The following is a conversation with Zach Bitter, ultra marathon runner and coach who held multiple
world records in the 100 mile run and other ultra endurance events. He is currently training for
a run across America, which for now is planned for September this year. Like many of the things
Zach has done in the past, this is a big, fascinating challenge. Quick mention of our sponsors,
Ladder, Velcampo, Noom and BetterHelp. Check them out in the description to support this podcast.
As a side note, let me say that Zach has been advising and coaching me on my own
running journey. I want to mention that Zach sent me some running shoes from Ultra,
which I think is a company that sponsors him. When I put those shoes on, I feel like Zach is
watching me and I get that extra motivation to make him proud. And by that, I mean I want to put
a lot of miles on those shoes. Running is something that has always been difficult for me,
but I love it because it is difficult. The hardest part is I'm left alone with my thoughts
for one or two hours. Some thoughts are dark, like thinking about mortality, my own and that of
others. Some are self critical, like personal weaknesses or dreams not realized. Some are simply
human feelings of loneliness, personal and existential. And yet, there are the moments
during a run when all that fades and I'm left empty of negative thoughts and full of appreciation
for the beauty of experience, of nature, life, the whole thing. This is why I return to running,
not to get in shape, but to face myself and to run through it. That's why I'm inspired by people
like Zach and by David Goggins and others like them who seek to find the limits of their body
and mind. This is the Lex Friedman podcast and here is my conversation with Zach Bitter.
Where does your mind go when you're running an ultramarathon? Are there a lot of positive
thoughts, negative thoughts, demons, inspirational things, maybe no thoughts at all?
Yeah, that's the really interesting part of the sport, I think, because you can,
essentially what it is when we're looking at like the 100 mile distance or anything that's
like all day long is you're going to have the full range of the full spectrum of emotions
of mental processes, both kind of positive, negative and in between. So it almost feels like
you've lived multiple, multiple lives or full life maybe is his way to say it in that one time
period. So it's like a, it's almost like a simulation of what you may experience in a
long period of time in a very condensed period of time. And I think that's just a weird mental
process to reflect upon and that's what kind of draws people back to it. But I mean, it's a battle
too, because if you're looking at it from a performance standpoint versus an experience,
you obviously want to minimize the negative mindset stuff. You want to try to keep those
emotions and those thought processes at a low. And I think when you can keep yourself from
letting those thoughts creep in, they, you end up having better races and it's, it can spiral in
either direction. Like I noticed like there's, there's kind of like this scenario that occurs
where in the beginning, like a negative thing creeps in your mind, it's like super easy just
to slap it down and say like, get out of here. You know, I've did the training, I'm fit, I'm
feeling fresh still, you know, everything's going well at this point in time. You get a little
further along in the race and you're starting to feel a bit of the fatigue, maybe a little bit
of self doubt creeps in, you start asking yourself, well, you know, maybe I should have done one more
long run or did I, did I not quite taper long enough? And those things can kind of spiral
into a negative way. And if, if you let it keep going, it keeps going all the way to like,
why am I here? Why am I doing this? This is stupid. All the way to like, there's another
one of these two weeks from now, I'm going to drop out of this one and sign up for that one
instead. And then you just find yourself in the exact same situation. So you kind of have to
go through the process, I think it's why I think the there's kind of a, I wouldn't say it's a rule
of thumb necessarily, but something I think is fairly valuable. If you do a hundred mile
of the first time, make sure you get it done. Even if it means like, you know, death marching is
what they'll call it in the alternate community to end of the race. Just to say like, you got
that full experience, you experienced the highs, the lows, the full thing, the starting, the crossing,
the finish line, that release of emotion when you're done and all that stuff. So that when you
go back to do it again, you have like a template to build off of, and you know, or you just have
some data to pull from about how your mind is going to work as well as your body so that you
can start practicing, well, what do I have to do to kind of keep my mind from spiraling in a negative
direction? Or how do I catch some positive momentum and kind of keep sending it that way and things
like that. And that just I think you just add to that over a career of running them or a series of
running them. And it sharpens. It's kind of like any sport with that where, you know, you always
have this balance between the youthfulness that you may have earlier in your career versus the
wise intelligence that you have maybe near the end of your career. So in terms of wisdom,
is there mechanisms by which you kind of observe the negative thoughts and let them go? So you have
people like the David Goggins is who kind of, he seems to almost like separate his mind into
there's the weak David that he hates. And then there's this strong one. I mean, there's like a
very contentious relationship there. So he basically says like, I refuse to be that person. And he's
almost like angry at that person. He's almost like sometimes literally yelling at that person,
the weak version of themselves. And then there's another more sort of Sam Heresy approach,
which is like, just observe the thought and let it go. Maybe knowing that this two shall pass,
like no matter what, this moment will not last forever and kind of sort of accepting the natural
flow of things and taking one step at a time and allowing whatever the negativity, whatever the
pain you're experiencing, just to pass, even if it means a death march, which one is more effective
for you? Which one, like, would you say generally speaking to the population is more effective?
Yeah, that's a really good question. It's probably unique to the individual. I wouldn't
argue that, you know, David is finding success with his approach. Some may argue it's an extreme
version. You know, Sam has obviously thought about these things and really probably, you know, I see
those guys as kind of two ends of the spectrum in just the way that they kind of come across in
general, where like David's like really actually a kind of high energy and Sam's kind of this calming,
soft presence, and he's just going to slowly methodically lay it all out there. And I think
there's value in both of those. I think most people are probably going to get a benefit from
pulling some from each. I mean, there's times where I need a kick in the ass and then it's like
have the Strong's Act, tell the Weeks Act to get moving. But there's also times where, you know,
it's just like, you know, a subtle voice entering my head about, you know, I don't know if I feel
quite right now, should I maybe pull back on the pace? And I think that little subtle voice
is best approached with a subtle positive voice where it's more like, okay, well, let's think
this through here for a second. You're 40 miles into a 100 mile race, you spent four months
preparing for it. You know from the workouts you did that you're ready for this, there really isn't
any real reason for you to slow down or to fall off your goal or your pace or, you know, reassess
what you're doing. Let's just give this another mile or two. And then we can reassess if we need
to in order to kind of figure out if I'm doing the right things or not. And I think like in that
situation, you definitely probably want to lean more towards the Sam Harris approach with that
because there's really no reason to, it's almost like the same thing you see with like
just training and even nutrition to a degree where like some folks, they just want to be like,
kind of like drilled. They want to be like yell that and said like, get going, get doing this.
And that helps and that motivates and that helps them stay accountable. Other people need some
softer love with it where it's like, you know, this isn't necessarily your fault. You were put
in this environment that kind of created an atmosphere of lethargy and maybe poor nutritional
choices and things like that. And so, but it's correctable. So we need to step away from that
and we need to kind of start heading in the direction that we know is going to bear fruit
down the road. And that person may respond better to that. So I think both those guys have great
value with their approaches. They're just probably polar ends of the spectrum and I think most people
are probably going to benefit like anything, right? You get the polarizing ones and those
are going to work great for the polarizing people, but then most people are going to fit somewhere
in the middle. So they're probably going to be able to kind of pull from both of those if they're
able to sit down and kind of like assess which one's going to work better in which situation.
So the quitting thing that you mentioned, the like the final stage, which actually I get to
much quicker than you seem to, which is like, why am I doing this? I get there with basically
anything I do. It's like, this is probably the stupidest thing I've ever done is the feeling
I get often. And then immediately you have these excuses that are like, there's all these other
better things you should be doing. Or the other alternative of that, like you said,
I'm not prepared enough for this moment. I'll be much more prepared in two weeks for the next
event. So like, why, let's try this again. Let's start over. Let's start over in two weeks.
How do you deal with that quit? Like, so maybe do you still go through that process and by way
of advice for people that are more sort of amateurish like me? How to deal with that quitting
voice? I think a lot of times when the quitting voice kind of comes in, it what it does is it
kind of just it comes in with the added disadvantage, I guess, in this situation of being kind of a
narrow scoped view where you're looking at like, what it's doing to you in the moment or how you're
feeling in the moment versus how are you feeling about the whole process. So one thing that I
started doing in 2019, and I think I don't think it's necessarily, I think, I think, I think this
was a big reason why I had one of my best racing seasons in 2019 that I had had to that date.
It was part of it was I started, I think, putting a little more emphasis on the big picture versus
putting emphasis on like, this is one opportunity or one day of work. And this is one, one emotional
kind of flare up. But how does that actually relate to my general broader picture? So when I
decide to do a race or an event or something like that, it's often four or six months out ahead of
time, you're planning to like kind of do a series of workouts and a flow of things where you're
going through the process of getting fit, getting ready, preparing for the specifics of the day and
all that stuff. And then you get to the race itself or the event itself. And it's very easy to look
at that and think that's an isolation, like I'm going to run 12 hours today, or I'm going to run
100 miles today or whatever it ends up being. And it's a lot easier to quit when you think to
yourself, I'm 40 miles into 100 mile race, you know, that's just a 40 mile run, which sounds kind
of silly to most people. But in perspective, and we're talking about the ultra marathon running
community, you know, it's a lot easier just to say like, well, you know, I'll scrap this 40 miles
and try again. It's a lot harder to say, I'm going to scrap the entire last four months, the entire
reason why I was doing it, the countless hours I spent in there. So I think I just try to reposition
it of like, I'm in a bad place right now, maybe in my head or I'm hitting a low point here. But
I'm 99% of the way towards the goal I set out four months ago when I add in all the work I did
leading up to that. So I think it's important to ask yourself why, because I mean, there are times
when you're doing something and you ask yourself why and you don't have a good reason. And then
maybe it is advantageous to step back and really reflect on that and decide, is this something
I actually want to invest time and energy into? Because, you know, someone like yourself who
is very much into a variety of different things, it can be easy probably to overextend and get,
I mean, I'm a very curious person. So there's like 100 things I would love to do if I wasn't
doing what I'm doing. And I know how to enjoy all of them. So at a certain point, though,
you have to say, okay, which one is going to be the most meaningful for me? And if the answer keeps
coming back to saying, I guess this is still the most meaningful to me out of that 100 things that
I could otherwise be doing, then I know that I'm in it for the right reason. And then I just need
to identify some of those things like, well, why did this one take the top spot out of the 100
things that I could have picked from? And keeping like a list of those in your head so that when
you get to that point where you start saying, why am I doing this? Why am I here? You just have
those kind of ready loaded in your head to say, well, I already took inventory on that before
I started this. And I knew this voice was going to come at some point, whether it's early, middle,
or late. And then you just remind yourself kind of what you were thinking when you had a little
more of a level head. Well, there's something about the thing you mentioned when you mentioned
the death march, it seems extremely valuable to just never quitting. Like in the moment,
if you decide to do something, like never quitting, even if you do go through the process and realize
that it's not, it's not the wisest thing to be doing within the full context of your life.
Like once you decide to do it, it seems like never quitting prevents you from sort of having
that escape clause from other things in your life. So I've quit on a few things in my life.
And I think I still, I deeply regret that because it opened that door. It's almost like a muscle.
I don't know. So I think I'm, I don't know, maybe everyone is, but I think I'm kind of a quitter.
You know what I mean? Like, I'm really good at coming up with reasons to quit. My mind is really
good at that. And I, it feels like I have to come up with like really work hard to make sure
that there's no quit that never allow myself to quit no matter how stupid the thing I'm doing is.
I don't know if any of that makes sense, but it just, maybe to rephrase this whole thing.
Do you think it's good to live life by the ethos of never quit?
Yeah, that's a really interesting thing. And I think it actually resonates with a lot of
ultra marathon runners because there seems to be a trend when you have someone who's
been in the sport for a long time where there's a point where they start the sport, right?
And they're like, super excited about everything. Everything's new. It's very easy not to quit
because you're like, Oh, this is the first time I've ever run a 50 case, the first time I've
ever run a 50 miles, the first time I've ever run a 100 case, the first time I've ever run 100
case, the first time I've ever run a 100 miles and so on and so forth. And when you're doing
that for the first time, I think there's a heightened motivation to not quit because you
don't want your first attempt to be a failure. And then you get a little further along and you
start reflecting on the landscape and all the opportunities that are out there and you find
yourself quitting on an event. And there does seem to be a trend where once you do that once,
now all of a sudden, like you described perfectly, that quit pops up in your head maybe a little
sooner the next time or maybe a little bit before. And I've certainly had these experiences in my
career as well. And what happens, I think, if you stick with it, again, I think it is important
to assess whether you really want to be doing what you're doing. But if you start recognizing
that about yourself in a certain activity where it's like, I think I might be pulling the plug
early on some of this stuff. I think you just need to kind of get into a position where you just,
at that point, you need to make a decision, do I want to keep doing this? If the answer is yes,
you hold yourself accountable to not quitting. And eventually what will happen is you'll find
yourself in a position where I'll use ultramarathon, for example, where you're just clicking on all
cylinders for that day. And you still get those scenarios where doubt creeps in your mind, you
have these low points. But for whatever reason, when those low points come, you're able to push
through them better than you would have in the past. And then you push through maybe two or three
more than you did after you had quit the time before. Then it's accountability time, right?
Because then you have to look back at that and say, well, why did this time was I able to be
mentally more strong and kind of push through those extra opportunities to quit when I wasn't
before? And it can be easy to look back and say and live kind of retroactively in the sense where
you're like regretting, well, why did I drop out of those races? Why did I do this wrong there?
And I just think that's where you have to kind of catch yourself and say, no, those things happen
to me in order to put me in a position where I decided, well, this time I'm not going to quit,
no matter what, minus my leg falling off, I'm not going to quit. And then you put yourself in position
to have that day where you push through more times than you ever have before and you just
redefine what you're capable of. And then once I think you do that, you start looking at those
earlier lessons as lessons. Were they failures on paper at the time? Probably. But can you pull
things from them to learn as to like, well, where is your actual threshold? Where is the limit
actually for you? And then kind of start redefining that stuff. So I think the never quit
mentality can be good in certain situations, but I don't think it's necessarily like a
holistic thing where you need to be in something where it's never quit, always do more, because
then you end up in a situation where you find this like margin of diminishing returns, especially
when it comes to training and workouts and things like that, where there are times where,
often there are times where you want to actually quit a little bit before you would have to,
because the stress that was required to elicit a growth response has already occurred. And
then just to do more is just going to require more recovery time to get back and do it again.
Yeah, this is the tricky trade off. Living by the never quit mentality, you're not going to achieve
optimal performance. In your head, you might. It seems like when you look at the full arc of human
history, the people who do great things are more leaning towards the never quit. Like, I feel like
at any one moment, you're more in danger of quitting than you are of being suboptimal.
So like, in terms of advice, it just feels like never quitting is always the right advice,
unless you deeply know the person. Maybe this is like wrestling mentality. I've seen too many,
and because I'm annoyed with the current culture telling me to relax and have a
work life balance and all those kinds of things, which all have a deep, deep truth to them.
But the reality is like, there's not enough people that walk out to me and like slap me and say,
get your shit together. Like, don't quit. Work harder. I think we need to hear that more.
And I remember that from the wrestling rooms, like that when you're pushed that way, when you're
forced to the very limit and you don't quit, that makes better humans.
I think people need to get that in their life. I think they need to have situations where
that becomes kind of the reality for them so they can see that avenue, experience that avenue,
where I think it's maybe to the extreme as if it becomes like your entire life philosophy,
where like every little thing you do is never quit.
But life is short, Zach. Like why? I mean, this is the problem I have. This is probably the
programming thing too, is over optimization is dangerous. It's like every once in a while,
I mean, you're, you do this kind of stuff. You're not, for example, with a hundred mile run,
I mean, you could just be doing that for the rest of your life and do like the most optimal
hundred mile run ever. But you keep taking on like new challenges. And there's a lot more chaos
than that. And there it feels like the muscle of never quit will be much more important than
the optimality of your training. Yeah. So there's probably a couple sides to me
with that kind of a thing where for one, I think when we talked about the why. So like,
I think the why can kind of shift a bit and it probably will if you do something long enough
or evolve, maybe is a better way to put it. And for me, like one of my big drives and one of my
big passions within ultra running is to first of all find an event that I really, really love to
train for and participate in. So for me, I feel like I've kind of identified that to a degree.
And that's kind of runnable hundred milers. So once I found that it became more of a driver for
me to see like, well, how fast can I run a hundred miles in a very controlled environment. So let's
eliminate weather, let's eliminate, you know, elevation, let's eliminate like having to wait
extra long to get crew or support and that sort of thing. And that's how you find yourself on a
400 meter track running a hundred miles. But for me, like that the important part of that is that
I can control the environment enough where if I come back year after year, I can retest myself
and have a decent ability to kind of say I improved or I regressed or I stayed stagnant. And I think
that's a big driver for me. But one thing I've recognized within that is if you just keep doing
that, like if I could probably pick three flat runnable hundred milers a year and optimally
prepare, race, recover and repeat without like burning myself out. But one thing I think I learned
also in 2019 was that sometimes you kind of need to step away from some of these really, really kind
of important markers in your like your performance or in whatever you're trying to do and take a
step away from it and try to do something a little different in order to kind of hit the reset button
on just like what I would call just like your mental energy to be able to continue to do it
at a high level. So almost like happiness. Exactly. Well, and here's the example. Like,
I mean, I love running in trails too. Most people would consider me a flat road track
runner, runnable ultra runner. But I like to do trailer runs too. So and at the end of 2018,
I recognized that I had been kind of pushing the gas pedal on trying to run fast hundred
milers for quite a while without really a break in that where it was like, okay, I did one. Now
I'm going to, you know, take a brief off season, but then I'm going to ultimately build up in peak
for another one. I might introduce some fun trail races in the context, but they're going to be B
races are going to be training races, time on feet type of stuff that are going to kind of mimic
like a long run essentially. And but the main focus they always in the back of my mind was like
getting on the track and seeing how much faster I can run 100 miles. And that just kind of that
energy that it takes to continually think by that, that I think the motivation to keep that
stoke high enough to really meet your full potential fades if you don't step away from
it for a little bit. So I took essentially half a year away from runnable stuff and just decided
I'm going to prepare for the San Diego 100 mile, which is like a much more elevation
in a technical trail type of an event. Is that a trail run or no? Yeah. It's a trail 100
miler actually just kind of just outside of San Diego. And yeah, it goes through it goes over
part of the Pacific crash trail and stuff. So it's very different than running on a runnable
surface. So to give you some context, like I ran was it I think just under 17 hours for that race,
whereas on a flat surface, I can run 11 hours and 19 minutes. So just the environment alone
added an extra, you know, five plus hours to the day. So it's just a different experience,
different skill set. And what it did is it allowed me to kind of step away from kind of focusing on
like splits on a track, running flat stuff, like preparing for things specifically for a flat
environment and start training for something that's more climbing and descending, more technical
running skill sets and things like that. And the cool part about it was, first of all, you know,
when you step away from something and enter something a lot different, I mean, it's still
running. There's still a huge advantage I had from the running I had done in the past that was
going to put me in a good position to be successful. But there was a much higher or much
bigger range of potential improvement for me. So through the like, you know, four plus months
I spent preparing for that race, you know, I noticed, oh, wow, I'm getting faster on this climb,
or I'm getting better at descending this technical trail. It was one of the most fun races I've run
actually. So it was kind of a cool experience. I ended up taking the lead at like 93 miles.
So you were racing, racing, like you were trying to get first. So still a race.
Yeah. So what was the enjoyable aspect of it?
I don't think I recognized it so much while I was doing it, actually, it surfaced afterwards.
I mean, the enjoyment of the race itself is like when you find yourself in a position where you're
sitting in basically second place all day long, and then you take the lead at 90, I think it was
like 91 or 92 miles. It's like, yeah, that's kind of a cool way to race.
But afterwards, I recognized a few things just about kind of pacing and, you know,
how to maybe pace the first half of 100 miler versus the second half. I also recognized shortly
thereafter, once I finished, recovered and decided my next event was going to be a flat
runnable race that, wow, I really was way more excited to do the workouts that I needed to do
to get ready to run a fast flat 100 miler. And I don't think that would have been the case had
I just tried to do another flat, fast 100 miler earlier or during that year and end up in a situation
where I maybe had normalized a suboptimal outlook on something that I had just done so many times
already. And I recognized that just every workout I did, I was like, I did this workout a year ago
and it was not nearly this much fun. And then the interesting thing about these track hundreds too
is like, you find yourself doing like your peaking phase where you're running your long runs, which
for me are usually like, you know, around 30 miles or so, and I'll do them back to back days.
And, you know, I try to replicate the environment I'm going to race on. So I'm
finding myself on a 400 meter track. And it's like, when I started doing that again, I just felt
like I was super motivated to go out there Saturday and Sunday and do those back to back
long runs and see the progress and then head on again the next week and do it again. So
I had some of my more enjoyable long runs, which are going to be the most specific
to race day environment that I had in quite some time. And I think that was really beneficial
and kind of putting me in a right spot to be able to push through barriers on race day
and put me in a position where quitting was going to be much less of a likelihood,
given the enjoyment I had in the months leading into the race itself.
Yeah, even the thought of quitting. Yeah. So you mentioned the track,
you've also ran 100 miles in the treadmill and the trail 100 mile. Broadly, if we zoom out,
what does it take to run 100 miles? For most of the world, that seems like a crazy distance to run.
So maybe it's interesting to ask not only is just setting the world record, but
purely running, what does it take to run that far?
Yeah, I mean, I think people probably overestimate what it takes in terms of just getting it done.
I think this is consistent in just running in general. I think the marathon was always a big
one with that where people thought like, well, you have to do this training or you just literally
won't physically be able to complete a marathon. And then we got into an era of kind of like
running as more of an enjoyment thing versus a performance thing. And then you'd have people
running granted much slower. I think if you look at the Boston marathon, average finishing times,
it goes from like, or maybe it wasn't the Boston marathon, I might have just been marathons in
general went from like three hours to five hours or something like that. So it's like,
people I think got past the fact that you can only do it if you're optimally prepared to, well,
I can do it and maybe not meet my full potential if I'm going to like not do much training,
which I wouldn't necessarily advise. But I mean, I've talked to people who basically run 100 miles,
sometimes almost off the couch. And it's like, it's, to me, what that says is just the human
body is incredible and what it can tolerate above and beyond what it's been exposed to,
if it has to, or if it feels like it has to.
So that's the basic sort of getting from point A from the start to the finish. It's the human
body and the human mind is capable of doing it without much preparation. But then you start to
increase the goal of performance and you try to get to actually a good like the most out of your
body that you can. How does that start to change then? Going from fun to performance?
Yeah, I think once you start putting marks or goals on outside of just finishing,
that's where it starts getting interesting because now you can maybe go on with multiple goals where
like if one falls off due to something that you didn't expect, then you have another one to target.
But you can always build those up and try to think like, well, I want to run faster than last
time or I want to break a course record or an age group record or something like that.
And that I think is just going to be a little bit of a different mindset because now you're
looking at every little thing from what do I need to do to prepare as well as what do I need to do
to be efficient on the day itself? So like transitioning aid stations and things like that or
do I want to pacer or not? Or does this race allow someone to like hand me a bottle at a
certain spot or do I have to be in specific areas to get that type of stuff? And what it ends up
doing is it ends up bringing a lot more variables to the table. And I think it's interesting because
there's always going to be more variables on the day than you are able to account for. So at a
certain degree, you have to kind of find yourself in a position where I'm going to make sure I take
care of the big ones or the ones that are like, obviously, I need to be ready for like my fueling
strategy, my hydration strategy, my pacing strategy, what workouts are going to put me in a position
to physiologically have this process go as well as possible. How am I going to like, you know,
hold myself accountable in aid station transition? So I'm not like having a ton of non moving time
versus moving time and things like that. So there's these like, big variables that you're aware of
and you're trying to optimize over the space of variables. So you get to start to play with that
when you're looking for performance. It's almost like moving from checkers to chess, right? You
have like, or maybe even like connect four or something like that, where it goes from just
kind of like, well, one foot in front of the other. And when I get to the next aid station,
I'll just eat whatever looks good, drink whatever, you know, quenches my thirst and then move on to
the next one to like, well, which one of these food products is actually going to make me move
a little faster to the next aid station or, you know, which one of these pacing strategies is
going to get me to the finish line faster than the other one and that sort of stuff. So it gets
more complicated, more interesting. And in my opinion, anyway, also there, I mean, but there's
a breaking point with that too, because like I said, there's an endless number of variables you
could account for. And as a distance gets longer, that list gets longer too. So you find yourself
in this position where, where you have to at some point say, okay, I've accounted for everything I
can reasonably account for. Now I need to be in a mental space where when something happens that
I wasn't able to account for, I'm able to respond to it with the right decision and keep going and
not dwell on it. Because that's another thing. I mean, you're running slow enough when you're
doing 100 miles, where if you make a mistake, you can sit there and just fixate on that mistake
and say, why did I do that? That cost me 10 minutes, blah, blah, blah, blah. When in reality,
what you need to do is that happened. Everyone else out here is going to have a situation like
that at some point. Mine happened now. I need to figure out how I can move forward at the fastest
sustainable pace and not think about what happened back there. And that's where I think it gets
really interesting. What would you say it takes to set a world record in the 100 mile?
First of all, I think you probably have to focus on that specific event.
I mean, there's the interesting about ultra running where it maybe deviates a bit from just
other endurance sports is there's such a wide range. I mean, we talked about a little bit when
I talked with the San Diego 100 versus kind of the flat, runnable stuff. So can you maybe paint
a picture of what are, there's a huge range of different kinds of ultra marathon events.
What are like the big ones in your mind? So marathon, we know the distance for a marathon.
There's the 50k. What are different kinds? There's a 100 mile that in your mind,
like kind of these islands where people gather off.
Yeah. So there's a few that really stand out. I would say the three biggest ultra marathons
right now, even from a historic, maybe not necessarily a historical standpoint, but
in modern day ultra running is going to be the Western States 100. That's the biggest,
most competitive 100 miler. It's on the trail side of things in the United States. Then there's
Ultra Trail Mountain Blanc, which is probably the most competitive 100 miler on the planet right
now. In previous years, it's been debatable as whether Western States or Ultra Trail Mountain
Blanc is more competitive. I think in the most recent few years, you're just seeing a lot more
of the bulk of international talent on the trail side of the sport heading over that way.
And then you have the road running side of things where the comrades marathon,
which is technically 56 miles, but they call it the comrades marathon,
is going to generally be the most competitive ultra marathon. The weird thing is the distance
thing, right? Because most people in the think of endurance sports, they're thinking about
precise distances like five kilometers, 10 kilometers and all that stuff. And then you get
into the ultra running world and it's like, sometimes it's the event. So like the Western
States itself is much more important than the distance. Right. Yeah. So the Western States 100
is actually 100.2 miles, which isn't that big of a deviation when you think about it, especially
when you figure like tangents are going to probably account for more than 0.2 miles on a
100 mile race. But the ultra trail mountain Blanc, you know, that's listed as a 100 miler,
but it's actually I think like 104, 105 miles. So, you know, it's more, there's different cultures
too. So the United States is definitely more motivated, I think, to try to get as close to the
exact distance. You're going to hear maybe a little more grumbling if someone says,
I signed up for this 100 miler and it turned out to be 103 miles versus like over in Europe,
they don't really care too much about the distance. They're more interested in like a specific route
or a loop. It's consistency important in terms of the exact length of the of the route. So like
you can compare performances from previous years, or are they a little bit more flexible?
Like they redefine the trail from year to year. Yeah. I mean, it's definitely hard to compare.
I mean, there's events that take, for example, I would say the best ultra marathoner in the
world today on the men's side is Jim Wolmsley. The reason I think Jim Wolmsley is the best is
because he is the most versatile and not only the most versatile, but he's arguably the best at
almost everything up to 100 miles. So there's a race called the Angeles Crest 100 miler.
They, the trail has drastically changed from when they originally had that event. And it's a different
time a year. So it's much warmer on that course. And Jim's not the kind of guy who would sit back
and say like, I can't chase that record. But I think Angela Crest, when he looks at the segments
and the pacing for that one, he's like, that one is maybe not even the same event anymore.
So you have that, you have some that are a little more controlled and a little more kind of like
preserved, I guess you would say, but I think it gets really rare on the trail side. I mean,
comrades is going to be very comparable from one year to the next, because that's a road race.
And that's where you get, you maybe get like the split in the sport from people who really want
that kind of like, I want to compare myself to someone who ran this course in 1970 versus like
someone who just says, I want to be competitive today. And, you know, maybe the weather is going
to be 30 degrees different from one year to the next on this course. But if I beat everyone on
this day, then I'm the champion of that big name race, like ultra trail Mont Blanc or Western States
100. And my legacy will be cemented because I won that big race. And it doesn't matter when or how
the course was or what the time even was to some degree. When you were optimizing for trying to
set the world record in the 100 miler, were you doing like analysis of maybe like what were the
variables you were looking at? Is it more in the realm of the actual race day, the track, what it
looks like versus like the variables of the training leading up to the, to the race? I mean,
it evolved a bit. Like I think the, as I learned more about just like what is required to kind of
really do that stuff. So there's some variables you can control for, you know, I try to control
for as many as I can. The big one that kind of stands out that you can't necessarily control for
is it's pretty rare where you get an event where they're just doing 100 miles on a track. It's
usually like, like an event of like a series of different events where they might be like,
some people out there doing 50k, some people out there doing 24, someday, like the event I did
that there's six day folks out there, they're trying to see how far they can get in six days.
So you have like this much wider range of pacing just due to like the distance. So, you know,
track protocol is always like you pass on the outside. So if you're running one of the faster
paces of the day, which when you go on up to six days, you're going to, and you're doing 100 miles,
you're probably going to be running faster than most people out there. Then, you know,
you just end up running more because you end up running in lane two around the turns and sometimes
lane three around the turn. So it's down to those little details that have a big impact. Yeah. So
I had to build that into my pacing strategy. I also have to build into the pacing strategy,
like relative non moving time. You know, I did a race just recently as the US track and field
100 mile road championships and I did not stop once other than like, I guess I technically stopped
to like in the aid station for like few seconds to like grab bottles and get myself wet because
it was like 94 degrees that day. But I didn't like stop at all during that race from like what I would
say is like a long period of time where we're getting up to like a minute, but that's pretty rare
even on the track. Like when I ran 11 hours and 19 minutes, I think I stopped three times for maybe
a total of like, I believe I have to look back for sure, but I think it was like three to four
minutes or something like that. So you got to, you got to figure that into your pacing strategy,
especially if you're chasing a specific time, because you know, if I'm pacing for, you know,
at the time, the world record was 1128. So if I'm pacing for say 1127 30 or something like that,
and I don't account for that three minutes of stoppage, then I might run the exact pace I had
planned on, but then I'm a minute off of the world record. So 1128, we're talking about 11 hours,
we're talking about 100 miles. Can you mention what the world record was? What kind of world
record you set? Can you tell your own story here of what you were able to accomplish?
That world record that I broke, actually, just recently got rebroke by a guy over in Lithuania,
Alex Sorkin, phenomenal race. I mean, he's won the 24 All World Championships. He's won the
Spartathlon, which is another big historic ultramarathon. It's 153 miles, so it's getting
a little more lengthy than some of the stuff that I've traditionally done. He ran 1114,
I believe it was 56 or 57. So his pace was 645 per mile. Mine was 647 and a half in terms of
just like the pacing strategy. It's just really cool because for me, the motivation with chasing
the world record was, it was multifaceted. I think there was, as I kind of moved through,
because I mean, it took me almost six years from the day I decided I want to chase that time
to the day I actually did it. And through that five to six years, I think I merged from just like
my number one goal was to try to break the world record to my number one goal is how fast can I
run this thing? And then ultimately, what needs to be done for a human to break 11 hours in 100
miles? Because I think that's going to happen soon. I think it's going to happen in the next few years.
What pace would that be? Sub 11 would be, I think it's like 635 right about per mile.
You're moving quick, but not so quick that like your void of being able to think about
everything as it's happening. So what's the pace in terms of if you look for each of the
one mile segments for the 100 miles? Is it pretty steady? Like in order to break 11 hours,
would it be pretty steady 635? Does it go up and down? Do you speed up at the very end?
Like what's the pacing? If you were to, maybe how much variability is there in the pacing
for an optimal performance here? Yeah. So if you're talking about someone, let's say that
there's someone, well, let's just take me for example, let's say that we could just like,
we had this infinite knowledge and we knew for a fact, a perfect performance for me would produce
a 1059, but I'm not going a second faster. And I need to do everything right in order to run a 1059.
I would definitely want to either have a slight negative or a slight positive split.
So when, and I think there's, I think there's a, there's a range in there where like,
being a little bit faster, the first half and the second half isn't going to necessarily
change your outcome or being a little bit slower, the first half and a little bit faster,
the second half isn't going to drastically change your outcome. So that's what you're referring
to the split is you're looking at the first 50 miles and the second 50 miles. And you can break
it down as, as tiny as you want. Like I think when you take out the outlier laps where I stopped to
use the bathroom, which would have been that like three to four minute non moving time that I talked
about before, my splits were really tight. I had a couple that were, it was weird because that,
that track that I did that on was actually like 400 and some weird number like 400 and like 38
meters or something like that. So I actually like ran like my numbers based on that. So they're,
they're normally I'm dealing with 400 meters. And then it's a little more like clean as to
like what my lap splits are going to range from one event to the next. So we're talking about
running 100 miles on a track. Yeah. And so then you can be really scientific about getting the,
the, the, the, the pacing right. And you're, you're running on the inside lane or is there
some kind of tricks to this? Like, are you alternating directions? Yeah, they'll switch
directions at most events every four hours. So you'll do four hours one way and then they usually
put a cone out. And once it hits like, like, let's say it hits four hours, you finish the lap
you're on and then you do a loop around and then you start the next, your next lap. Would you say
you take the exact same number of steps? Like when you're really in the groove, when you're taking
the pacing, are we talking about that level of precision or is it a little bit more feel?
You mean like footstrike frequency? Yeah. Like frequency then over the distance to the lap,
would you say it's so precise that you're like, you get in this groove where it's like perfect?
Yeah. Gosh, you're making me wish I would have strapped more like a foot pod to my,
but like, yeah. So I think like my guess is it's pretty precise. Like it's,
Is there a video of this? Sorry, I keep interrupting. Is there a video of this? Cause I,
I've actually, this is now three years ago, build a computer vision algorithm that counts footstrikes.
Oh really? Yeah, for fun. Yeah. I was trying to understand, we'll talk about that. We have the
same definition of fun when I've got my, find myself on a track for all day and you find yourself
counting footstrikes. I was trying to understand if, if there's how much variability there's in
extreme like elite performers within a particular race, but also across races. It was just interesting
to me from a robotics perspective, if like how much variability there is in the human body
in the way they use legs to move quickly. I think my guess would be that at the individual level,
it's going to be pretty precise, assuming the pacing is consistent. So you get, so
my pacing on that day, I ran two minutes faster, the second 50 miles and I did the first 50 miles.
So my splits were very even most of the day. I actually ran so my fastest miles at the end.
So there's going to be probably a slight variance from my fastest miles to my slowest
mile in like your cadence or your foot strike, but probably not by a huge margin, but you might
have a pretty big variance from one person to the next. So you get someone whose gait is just a
little bit different. So like for me, I supinate, which means I kind of come down on the outside of
my foot and I'm kind of more of a mid four foot striker. So that's going to kind of impact my cadence
to a degree, whereas you might have someone who is kind of more mid to rear their foot or heel
striker and they might pronate where their foot kind of rolls in. So that person may have a little
bit of a different cadence as well. So you get someone, and I think you see this in elite
marathoning too, which is going to probably just be a much larger data pool, much, much more
probably precise from just like a number of opportunities to study this. And I think even
their ranges from one person to the next can be, I wouldn't say drastic, but to the degree of like
10 to maybe even 20 steps per minute or something like that from one person to the next.
But most people, the faster they go, the higher their cadence is going to be,
the slower they go, the lower their cadence is going to be. But there's going to be probably a
range of optimal lowness and I don't know, probably optimal highness too than that.
If you can just linger on the 11 hours, the person, first of all, would you like to be the person that
breaks 11 hours? And second of all, the person that does break 11 hours, like what would it take?
And third question, is it even possible in your engine?
Yeah, I mean, I would definitely, I would be lying to you if I said I didn't want to be the first
person to break 11 hours and 100 miles. I think that'll be, would be a cool like barrier to be
the one to usher that in. But with that said, I think I'm much more motivated in seeing it done
from the sense that like, I think when we're talking about records, it's something that
is inevitable that it's going to get broken. So I mean, we were talking about happiness before
this, right? So I've contemplated this in the past, where I was thinking to myself like,
if my motivation is to break a world record or any record for that matter, course record,
and have that be my defining reason or my defining motivator, I probably need to do
an assessment of what I'm kind of where my mind is at and where my focus is at.
And just reflect on how I'm behaving in life, because it's going to get broken, right? I mean,
I could run 1050 tomorrow. And in 10 years, chances are that's no longer going to be my
world record anymore. Someone's going to run faster than that. So if you're living to hold
on to a record versus living to try to move the sport forward, which anytime you break a world
record, you're moving the sport forward, then you have to look at that as like that was my
contribution. And whether I contribute again or not is kind of besides the point. What you want
is that your performance, your contribution brings new people into the sport who are excited,
motivated, and they can make their contribution. And then we can ultimately see, well, how fast
can someone run a controlled environment 100 miler? And that's what I really want to see,
because I think I've gotten so much enjoyment from the sport. I mean, I've gotten so much
enjoyment from the sport, I mean, I'll turn it into a career. And I think there's other people
who can do the same thing, and it's not necessarily going to come at the expense of my career,
but it's going to bring more attention to the sport. It's going to bring more interest in the
sport. It's going to open the sport up to people who maybe otherwise would have never thought about
it, seen it, considered it. And to me, I think that's like a much more rewarding goal than saying,
I want to break this record and I want to hold it for decades or I want to die with this record.
So I never have to see someone go faster than me. Well, that's the progress of human civilization
was down on the shoulders of giants and we keep creating cool stuff. Well, and it's the other
thing is just like, if you're honest with yourself too, it's, I mean, we're seeing this right now
in the running world where, you know, new innovations come in, new technologies come in,
new nutritional approaches come in. And then we see like the new crop of folks have advantages
that the old crop didn't have. And it can be easy to look back on that and say, like, hey, well,
you know, if I would have had that product or if I would have done that, I would have run this.
But then you're getting into that negative, you know, thought process again, which I
generally try to stay out of. I think that came in, if I had fire, I would have done
way better with this. Look at these idiots up there with their cars. If I would have had a car
back then, I would have been ruled the world. Let me just zoom up briefly and ask you about kind of
beauty and love. What's the most beautiful thing about running to you? Why do you love it?
I think there's kind of a couple of directions to look at it through or lenses look at it through.
There's like the in the moment, right? There's always going to be that run where
you're clicking along and things just feel great. You get some endorphins and you get the, you know,
the, the quote unquote, runner's high and that sort of stuff. And that's like just like this
great feeling that you can kind of tap into on the like the real like, like in the moment type of
level. You know, you've my wife and I talk about this because she's a competitive ultra runner as
well. And you will have a day where, you know, we'll take a forced day off or something like that.
And it's necessary, right? It's going to allow the enjoyment to continue. But you get into this
like routine of I wake up in the morning, I do this run and that kind of gets my day started.
That gets my, my energy's up. I get that runner's high afterwards. You remove that from the equation
for a rest day. And you just sort of like, Oh, man, I don't feel like I never got started today.
Like, you know, it's just this weird thing. It's almost, I think it's, it's funny because
non runners don't always like necessarily recognize it because for them, it's the complete opposite.
They're like, if I can get away from not having to run today, that's going to be a good day versus
Yeah. But it's one of those things that I think gets more addictive the more you do it. So
that's purely from the running perspective. There's this joy of the runners high of the post
after the run, you feel like you can take on the world, that kind of thing. Yes. And I think that's
one of the drivers from just a quality of life standpoint, just a, you know, and in the moment,
immediate gratification standpoint, but then there's like, I think the bigger picture stuff
or the longer term stuff. And for me, that enjoyment is like, just the process, like of,
okay, I'm starting at this fitness level. And I'm going to do these workouts. And by doing these
workouts, I'm going to see incremental progress from them. And then that's another kind of like,
kind of short term gratification that's maybe a little longer than the day to day, but
still like shorter than like a career or a, or a buildup for a particular race,
where you're saying, you're seeing yourself like, okay, maybe I'm focusing on short intervals
right now. And on week one, I covered this much distance in three minutes, but by week four,
I'm covering this much distance. And you can just see that progress is almost like in elementary
school, when you get the gold star for reading a book, it's like, did that gold start really mean
anything? I don't know, but I felt great when they gave it to me. Yeah. Something about just
finding improvement. And people love to see improvement, I think. So that's where I think
you can also get some value. And it was saying like, I started here and I got there. And then
I think there's also just like, I would call this maybe more the cherry on top, which is like,
where you express your work, which is the race itself, where that's going to be kind of the
thing that kind of like, shows up on the end result and where it kind of identifies whether
you did things right or wrong. Yeah. So there's a sense which in which training is a kind of
a preparation towards race day and race day being the thing where you get to be the artist,
you get to create this, this piece of art and they might suck and might be beautiful. I mean,
I see in the grappling world, I see competition in that same way, when I feel the best about it,
which is like, sounds pretentious to say, but like, I'm trying to be the best version of myself in
this particular day of competition and to do something that I'll be proud of in an artist way,
not in a kind of, some kind of numerical way, but like as a holistic sense, like do something cool,
like in grappling, that means for me, that means like not stalling, like taking big risks and
trying to dominate another person in the context of grappling and do it, like push myself to
limit both cardio wise and technique wise and just play beautifully. I mean, you see this in
kind of chess, there's systematic chess players and there's people that allow themselves to have
those moments of genius, where they take the big risk that eventually pays off or doesn't.
And that to me is art. I mean, there's art within running, there's art within chess,
there's art within grappling and you got a chance, like all the training is more like science and
then it feels like the competition day's art. Yeah, I think that that's a really cool way to look at
and I think it's when you really open up the perspective of that too, it's like even obviously,
you know, having a great day, like winning the tournament or, you know, getting further than
you were expected to or beating someone who you've never beaten before or something like that,
or in the running perspective, like achieving that goal time, that sort of stuff. Obviously,
those are kind of like the ones you, when you're honest with yourself, you really want and you're
going to probably get the most satisfaction out of. But even when they don't go wrong, like maybe
like with your grappling tournament analogy, the, you know, maybe the guy you're grappling against
does a move on you and you're like, I was not prepared for that move. So now the enjoyment
becomes, okay, back to the drawing board. Now I need to find out what do I do when that happens
to me next time. And that's where the, I think the why comes in again. Same thing with running,
like maybe I make a mistake and, you know, like eat something I didn't really want to eat or thought
was going to work, but didn't work. And it costs me more time than I gained by having it or something
like that. And then I go back to the drawing board and say, okay, well, I can't do that,
that didn't work. Or if I'm going to do that, I need to be more prepared to be able to do it.
And I love that part of the sport. Just the rearranging of things and adjusting and tinkering.
There's some sense in which the mistakes and like the flaws give us meaning. Because like, if, if
everything, if you weren't able to find mistakes and something you've done, it feels like the life
would be void of meaning. It's a lost opportunity too. Like if, I mean, like when I look at even
my 100 mile race of 1119, I can find spots in there where I was like, oh, you know what, I could
clean that up a little bit. Maybe if I do this differently. And I mean, that's going to get me,
you know, a little bit faster. If I sat back and said, hey, well, things went great that day.
Cool. Let's see if we can replicate it. Then, you know, I probably run 1119 again.
So can we talk about training a little bit? Yeah. What does your training look like year
round, day to day, hour to hour, like optimal, maybe, maybe you want to pick a race in the context
to which you want to discuss that. But, and also people should follow you on Instagram. You have
a lot of kind of interesting like little glances into your training process, into your training
thinking, which is quite fascinating. But if you look at an optimal training process, what does
that look like? Yeah. So I think the, if we were looking at it from like a philosophical level
or like an approach level, I think there's some things that carry over from regardless of the
distance. So I think working on your weaknesses and things that are least specific to what you're
going to do on race day, but are still going to be important things in terms of improving your
ability to perform on race day or maximizing your potential with the things that are specific,
you do first. I say that, but there's a caveat with endurance sport. I think maybe even more
specifically with things like our ultra marathons or 100 milers where you want a really strong
aerobic foundation or like a base before you really start, I think, structuring things towards a
specific one. So for me, I think like a target for me is oftentimes like, you know, getting really
fit at like what my pace would be at like my aerobic threshold or what a lot of people maybe
call like a maximum aerobic function. I mean, the running world is kind of weird where we have
like these terminologies where there's sometimes multiple words that essentially mean the same
thing, but one is from like a just an actual physiological reaction and one is just like
a feeling and stuff like that. So you mentioned time versus time in optimal physiological state.
Like how important is it just to get like running done versus like running in a particular pace?
That would depend on the event, I would say to a degree. And there's
contradicting ideas about like kind of how to structure it. I think a lot of times like
you do want to like time on feet in most cases is just going to be like I'm running easy,
whatever feels easy that day. And that can be different from one day to the next. Like I might
feel great. And you know, that produces a much faster pace than if I, you know, feel really
miserable or something like that. So that's why I think a lot of times running, well, they'll do
the whole perceived perceived effort or perceived exertion. And there you're looking at kind of
understanding the response your body has to a certain effort level, and you're supposed to
target a certain effort level in order to like get a certain response. So to maybe simplify
that a little bit or make it a little clearer, like, I think I focus on essentially like short
intervals. I focus on longer intervals or tempo runs. I focus on like race, pace, intensity,
which is a lot of times what I'll build my long run around. But I'll also like those are kind of
like the small pieces to the puzzle. Those are the options you're working with.
Yeah, but I'm going to always try to work with those options on top of a massive
aerobic base, which is going to probably be like 80% of the work.
So how do you build that massive aerobic base? What are we talking about? Just distance?
Distance and essentially, so I like to call it micro stressing, because you're going to
always start at a different spot, depending on where your fitness level is at and depending
on where you're at as an individual, I'm going to be targeting my aerobic threshold. I'm going to
get right up to it, but not necessarily cross over it. It's, you know, it's, it's been popularized as
maximum aerobic function as kind of a training philosophy. That philosophy in itself, I think
maybe is a little more like holistic where they're saying, do this basically all the time.
And by doing so, you're going to like, you're going to raise your aerobic potential by so much
that, you know, you can kind of like race yourself in a shape at that point. And this would be maybe
more specific for like shorter distance or endurance runs where you're not going to race
yourself in the shape of 100 milers. But for five days, you might, you might do like a huge
base building phase where you're going up to that maximum aerobic function or that aerobic
threshold and you're watching your pace come down at that. So the rule there is basically like,
if you're seeing improvement, that's the sign you're looking for, or which would just be your
pace dropping at that heart rate or at that intensity. And if you're seeing that continually
go down, you're heading in the right direction. If you start seeing it go the opposite way,
you're, you're probably overreaching where you're trying to do too much of it. So that's kind of
dictates how much the dose, I guess you'd say. When we talk about maximum aerobic function,
we're talking about heart rate as the ultimate, as the really important metric here. So maintaining
a particular heart rate during the run. Is that the measure that like, how do you know you're in
the right place? Yeah, yeah. And then that's where it gets a little tricky because like,
unless you go into a lab and get your aerobic threshold tested, it's really hard to have like
an exact number on it. You know, Dr. Phil Maffetone with the maximum function process,
he'll say 180 minus your age is going to give you your. Yeah, that's the math 180 formula that I
thought was fascinating for it's like, uh, in the same way equals E equals MC squared is fascinating
that there could be a formula that captures like optimal running. Yeah. So that for people who don't
know, that's 180 minus your age. If you train at that heart rate, if you run at that heart rate,
you're going to progress a lot. And here's the advantage of that. I think like with any of
these things, you want to look at it through where are the advantages here and I need to account for
those and then where are the potential disadvantages and then decide for me as an individual,
do these advantages outweigh the disadvantages and what's the alternative approach and is that
going to produce more advantages or less. So with, with maximum function, uh, here's some
advantages. Like it is low enough intensity where you can train pretty consistently at a fairly high
volume with a very low injury risk with a very low like things that are going to maybe lower your
quality life, like muscle damage and things like that. Um, it's a more efficient way in the sense
that you're going to be like prioritizing like fat metabolization, which, um, I mean, if you're
looking at like Jeff Follick and Dr. Jeff Follick and Dr. Dominic DiAgostino, some of their research
and things like that, like they're going to show that, you know, that's going to be a little cleaner
way to go about things from just a recovery standpoint, a breakdown standpoint. So they could
be like a, what they call like a fat adapted athlete. So you can go to your fat stores for energy
if you're applying this map. What is it called by the math 180? Is that a good, what are your
thoughts about in general for yourself and for the broader population? I think the math 180
formula is about as good of a formula as you're going to find in terms of capturing as many people
as you can get away with capturing with a kind of a universal thing, uh, like any of these things.
I mean, it's, it's more likely kind of on a bell curve where like the bulk of that 180 minus
their age is probably going to be a pretty good, at least starting point to kind of figure out
where that is. There's some other things you can like maybe use to kind of check it that I like to
do. If I'm, let's say I just, I did 180 minus my age and I went out and I started running and it was
like, I'm running along and I'm just like, my, my breathing is labored. I'm, you know, I'm struggling
to get a sentence out without gasping for breath. Well, that's my body telling me I'm probably not
actually at my true like math number or my true like underneath my true aerobic threshold. Like
aerobic threshold and maximum of function. You should be able to do that for hours and you
should be able to breathe pretty efficiently and talk. Yep. Carry a conversation. Other people
will say like you, another way to kind of gauge it, if you can breathe in your nose and out your
mouth, that's not necessarily the best way to do on a, from a performance standpoint, but it can be
a good kind of governor that will allow you to like, if you can, if you can no longer breathe
in your nose and out your mouth, you're probably going too fast to actually technically be at your
math pace or under your math pace. Yeah. I had a, actually when I was in better shape, I had trouble
getting to that math number. I found myself like either I would be doing way too much work.
Like it was too hard to do it. It was too hard to get to that number. I was running a much lower
heart rate, like 10 to 20, what do you call that beats lower? And that's, I was still for myself
happy with the pace. It was a good pace. And I was felt good. I was smiling and enjoying life. And
the moment I take myself to that level of like the math 180 level, that's like, that felt like a
real work. And it felt like I can't do that for five, 10, 15 miles. Like I, I started feeling
it like this is a one or two mile thing. But I think his answer to that, I feel Mephidone's
answer is maybe you're supposed to like, what, maybe do some more sprints or something like that
or build up your, maybe like I'm too weak. Yeah. You're wise to like, yeah, like that's a sign
that you need to work on some stuff. You can't just keep enjoying life. There's, there's two ways
to look at that. I think, and I think you're, you're, you're right on. I think they would,
what the advice from that, from that kind of a process would say is either you, you're doing
too much of it. So it's getting too hard for where your skeletal muscle system is currently at
for that particular activity. So like, I mean, it can be different too. Like if you're cycling
versus running, you know, that's a little bit of different mechanic where it can be different,
where you could take a super fit cyclist and then put them on, you know, the, the bono volume,
they're going to be able to tolerate relative to what you're going to do when you remove like
impact forces and things like that is going to be lower if they haven't been practicing that
activity. So for you, like, you know, you're prioritizing like, you know, wrestling and
mixed martial art, not mixed martial arts, but jiu jitsu type stuff. So, you know,
running is maybe kind of that, that, that secondary activity versus the primary activity.
But yeah, so what they would say is probably like maybe instead of doing that at, let's say you
were doing that for like 30 miles a week or something like that, and it was getting too hard
to continue, they'd say, you know, come back to 20, get used to 20, get comfortable with 20,
then let's get you up to 25 and 30 and kind of just like inch you along.
One of the intuitions I had about the ways I was failing at running is the form was probably not
great. Like the way to get to those 30, 40 miles is to get the form right. Maybe I was doing too
big of steps, not so like playing with a different gate, playing with a different kind of the form
of your form, the economy, the efficiency. Yeah. So that was the intuition, like I was doing
something wrong. But I suppose that's the benefit of these kind of formulas. It challenges you to
think like, how can I improve this kind of stuff? Well, and it also, it simplifies it so much that
you're forced to, right? You're forced to optimize within that real strict parameter versus,
is am I doing my short intervals right, but my long runs wrong? Or am I doing my like long
intervals right, but my short intervals? And then you just kind of complicates things when
you start throwing a lot of stuff there. And for most people, especially when they're first
getting started, you know, you're, you can't overcomplicate it, or you're just going to like,
you're going to do like a bunch of half right, half wrong things, and then not really know where
your progress or your deficits are necessarily at. So I do think this is an amazing approach,
especially for people who are just getting into it and building that, that foundation,
where, where I think maybe you want to deviate from that a little bit, especially when you
start to get into these events that are operating well outside that intensity. So you take something
like, you know, let's say it's a race that takes you in the neighborhood of around like 12 minutes
or something like that, then you're going to be running significantly faster than your, your
maximum or function pace. So most of the research is going to say at some point in time, you need
to get around to practicing the pace at which you're going to perform at and really fine tuning
the mechanics, the efficiencies, how it feels, how to judge it, how to pace it at the pace
you're going to try to compete at. So there's obviously like a large range of targets there
when we're talking about the endurance world in general, where, you know, you have these shorter
events like five kilometers, and then you also have 100 mile races, which are going to typically
be quite a bit below your maximum aerobic function, especially on these trail races.
I need to admit something. So I don't measure the runs at all in terms of time.
I get competitive with myself. So I kind of decided that running for me is going to be this
thing where I just go by feel. Is it possible to be that kind of runner and, you know, still have
running as part of your life and be a good performer in running? I actually think that's,
that's where you want to get to. The problem is most people have a hard time getting to that,
because they'll go out and they'll run with a friend and match their pace, or they'll go out
and they'll say, well, I want to run this pace, so they'll target that pace or target a specific
heart rate, which is, you know, not necessarily how they maybe feel good doing it. So I think like
once you, I mean, obviously, I think when you put a race on the calendar, if your goal is
performance, it's a little harder to just say like, well, I'm going to run where it feels good today,
because eventually you have to get around to doing what's specific. But from just a fitness
standpoint, health standpoint, enjoyment standpoint, I think it's totally fine to go out and say,
I'm going to run what feels good today. And, you know, maybe someday you will feel like at the end
of the run, I'm going to do a couple sprints just to get some, you know, that because it does,
that one's a hard one to kind of jumpstart. But once you do it, and you realize how kind of good
it feels, maybe to throw in a few accelerations at the end of a run. And then you, you say, oh,
wow, that feels pretty good to do that. I feel a little more accomplished. That's right. That's
a forcing function. But I like to finish runs with sprints anyway, because you're already there
without right, you don't need to the timing. I'm afraid of the time becoming a drug. But the flip
side of that is useful tool to get you to learn the right form, the right feel, like what it feels
like to have to be in good shape. And then you could throw out the time. Well, I think too,
with with feel running, and what I mean by that is X kind of back to that perceived effort thing
where like, you do enough of it, and you start being able to recognize, like, I can go out. And
if you said, okay, run, you know, 60 minutes at your aerobic threshold, I could go, I could know
where that is on my heart rate. And I could go up there and just say, like, okay, I know what
that feels like, and go and run that feel. And I'm going to hit that spot. Like, I bet you if we
looked at my heart rate data after they'd be right in there. And I wouldn't have to look at some of
that's just experience. Yeah, some of it's just understanding, like, when like, not noticing
the physiological responses when you cross over versus step a little bit too below it.
But you can get yourself daydreaming and forget I'll do this sometimes too, where I'll be tired,
because I'm kind of like you too, where when I'm getting really fit, especially with my foundation,
like, I got a, you know, I'm moving pretty quick at my aerobic threshold. So like, if I start daydreaming
too much, I can notice, oh, I'm drifting back a little bit, I look down at my heart rate amount,
oh, yeah, I'm 10 beats under. You know, so you do it, it does take a little bit of, I think, just
awareness. But it's also not necessarily something where you have to be so exact that you're hitting
an exact heart rate all the time. There's usually a range. And there's even like, some fluctuations
where like, if you've been healthy for a year or two, without any injuries, and you've been fit,
that you can probably add five beats to your maximum aerobic function. If you're using that as kind of
your target from the 180 minus your age formula. So let's try this, lay this out for yourself. But
for others, you, you offer ready made plans for people, you know, depending on the, I think the
I think the key thing there is the distance, maybe you can elaborate. But what does that plan
look like usually? What are the key options as you already kind of mentioned? And how does your
week look like? How do a lot of people's week look like in terms of splits? Are we talking about,
you know, in terms of rest days, in terms of how often do you speed work versus longer distance,
you mentioned long runs? Like, is there something you could say that's generally applicable about the
structure of these plans? The ready made plans, I definitely follow like a philosophy. And it's
going to be the kind of like lockstep in that. So for those, like there's always going to be a
sacrifice when you do like a ready made plan, because there's you're removing the individual
context there. So for folks who are like really want to get into the weeds, I usually do like a
personalized coaching plan with them, where we sit down, we actually look at their strengths,
their weaknesses, and really kind of go in from that perspective and fine tune it. And it also like,
it avoids a situation where, oh, my ready made plan says, I'm supposed to do this run today,
but I don't feel great today. So what do I do? And some people are fine with that because they're
aware enough of like the process that they can adjust it themselves. Other folks just need a
little more support. So that's kind of the difference there. But in terms of the structure
of it, it kind of goes with an approach where we're saying you build this foundation, you're
going to spend, you know, usually anywhere between eight to 12 weeks just building up
your your aerobic foundation, you're going to be doing a lot of stuff that are kind of at,
I call them base runs, but they're basically your maximum aerobic function or you're up to your aerobic
threshold type stuff. And they're really going to get really fit with that. And once they kind of
have that foundation laid, then it's time to get into the specifics of whatever distance they're
doing. So if it where it'll differ will be like if they're doing right now on those plans, I think
I've got 5k half marathon marathon 50k 80 to 100k and then 100 miles. So if they pick a 5k plan,
the order of operations is going to be different than if they pick the 100 mile plan, you're going
to see some of the same workouts show up in that plan and just going to be different areas of it.
So once they're really fit at that, you know, that foundational level, then, you know, if they're
doing say 100 mile plan, they might start doing some short intervals, which I would on my plans,
I usually range between 30 seconds up to four minutes. It's kind of that short interval range.
Can you describe what you mean by short interval is it's like a sprint and a rest?
Yeah. Yeah. So I'll use basically like I'll use like a basic a 12 minute time trial. And that's
going to kind of like dictate for them what the intensity and the pace is going to be for some
of those. When they're under a minute, they'll push past that a little bit. But usually when we're
up to like above a minute and certainly up to four minutes that like whatever pace or intensity that
they get for that kind of 12 minute time trial where they're just seeing how far they can go in
12 minutes is going to be kind of like about where they're going to target for those intervals. So
then those intervals are going to be structured. Let's say they're doing two minute intervals,
they're going to do two minutes at that intensity that they could do for 12 minutes at a time trial,
then they're going to do a two minute real easy job or maybe even walk just to kind of bounce back
and they're going to repeat it. How do you figure out how far you can go in 12 minutes?
Is that just trial and error? You build up to it, there's formulas, what?
Yeah, there's some newer formulas that are probably a little less brutal.
Where you kind of, I haven't really dove into these that in depth yet. I know like
that you can kind of replicate it by doing like a short, a very short interval and then a slightly
longer one. And then like another one where like at the end one, that last one will kind of indicate
what it is. And so you're doing less of it to get the same answer to the question.
But sometimes I think when it's someone who's new, I'd rather them just do a 12 minute time trial
because it's easy for them to execute in the sense that it's pretty clear. You do a warm up,
you do some strides, maybe some dynamic stretches and you just run as hard as you can for 12 minutes
as evenly paced as you can manage. And I mean, if it's going to produce the data I'm looking for.
No matter what happens, they'll produce the data.
I mean, you can screw it up, I guess. You can go way too fast and then you have this scenario
where like, oh, it looks like your first two minutes were drastically faster than your last
two. And then it's like, oh, we maybe screwed that one up. But I mean, really, you don't even
need to do the time trial technically. A lot of times you can go off of feel like what we
described with the threshold stuff. And it's a high enough intensity where your body's going
to kind of limit you to a degree where if I said we didn't do the time trial and just started
doing the intervals, we could figure out that if they're doing them right or not, if we see a
scenario where, oh, it looks like these first two intervals were significantly slower than the last
two, chances are we're still not quite dialed in in terms of what the intensity is that you
should be targeting for those. And as you do a few, you just get to know the pacing of it a
little better. And then you start seeing more even splits. So like, you know, their first two minute
intervals pretty close within a couple seconds of their second, or I guess we'd be looking at
distance if we're doing time. So like you went approximately the same distance on that last one
as you did the first one. And then we're just looking for improvement over time. So, you know,
we might spend four, six weeks kind of focusing on improving that we're going to still include
kind of foundational running volume where you're going to be running like an easy pace and enjoyable
pace kind of in the interim. And then there's going to be some rest days. And that's going to
be where the levels come in my like level one plans are going to be like four day a week training
plans level two are going to be five day level three are going to be six day with one day off.
And you can obviously operate outside of those. Those those are just the ones that I put up for
the ready made when I'm coaching people kind of personalized, we just we look at like what
their history is with running their schedule, all sorts of stuff. Because oftentimes people get
hung up on like, well, what are the elites doing? What are the professionals doing? What are the
Olympians doing? It's like, well, it's like, what the Olympians are doing is they're waking up and
they're living and breathing everything around this one race that they're going to do in four years.
Or so it's like, we need to step away from that if you're working, you know, 10 hours a day,
and you got kids and all this other stuff too. So there's a lot of variables that make it more
interesting to coach someone who's actually like, not an elite athlete, or someone who's a
professional athlete, I should say. But but yeah, so they're going to do that stuff, those shorter
intervals, for probably about like four to six weeks, if they're doing if they're doing a longer
race, like 100 miles, if they were doing say a 5k, we'd start bringing those workouts in
near the end of their plan, because that's going to be specific to their race pace. That's going
to be the intensity that maybe they're doing for, you know, like a 3k or 5k or something like that.
So it's going to be more relative to what they're going to use. So it follows that philosophy,
the plans follow that philosophy of weaknesses and least specific stuff early. And then we
start phasing closer to most specific stuff and strengths as you get kind of near to the end
of the plan. And then the distance of the time that you're going to spend out doing whatever
event it is going to dictate how those kind of get ordered in there. I wonder if I could ask you
for some sort of advice, maybe almost maybe look at me as a case study of a particular
runner and then see how we can plan stuff out. So which context to give? Okay, so I have been,
first let me say how much we're currently in Austin. I want to say how much I love Austin
for many reasons. First and foremost, people are super kind and just like, there's so much love
that I've experienced immediately when I came to the city versus many of the other cities I've been
in. It's not quite as welcoming and full of kindness immediately. I mean, I really love it here in
Austin. And because I've been going through a bunch of stressful stuff, I just kind of gave myself
a chance to say, okay, I'm going to stick to a diet of carnivore keto, but I'm going to eat as much
as I want. Because primarily because just barbecue was part of the love I was getting here. And I
was like, either I resist or just give in and I decided to give in and actually use this as an
opportunity to relax and have fun for the past three, four months plus whiskey and so on. And then
the training kind of all, I also let go of the training a little bit just to relax, to really
focus on the work, focus on the love I've been getting, all those kinds of things. But now I
just kind of want to set a goal for myself to get back into both competing and grappling,
but also doing a hanging out with David Goggins and doing a conversation with him. But almost,
this is my own personal kind of race that I'm looking forward to. And in terms of distance,
that means running with David, something like a marathon plus plus. It's like, it's unclear what
plus. So my goal would be to continue eating carnivore, which is a whole other topic. I'd
love to talk to you about. I feel great psychologically, sort of in terms of mental performance in my
work when I eat carnivore. And physically, I love it. I've never felt any kind of need for carbs
to improve performance in my running or anything else. Combine that with fasting, intermittent
fasting or eating once a day. I just, that's when I feel the best. What else? I also feel
best. And this is something you can push back on. I feel best when I just run every day,
like no breaks ever, and usually the same way every day. So I know this is suboptimal. It'd
be interesting to hear your opinion of just how suboptimal that is. So I think that actually lays
out where my mind is. I'm happy eating carnivore once a day. I like running every day. The goal
is to run a marathon in two months ish, two months plus, and then about three months to do a bunch
of competitions and grappling. Okay. With those parameters, I think like you actually probably
would be a great candidate for maximum heroic function training strategy. Like you want that
consistency where I'm going to do the same thing each day. You don't want to beat yourself up so
much any one day that you can't get out and do the next one. That's the sweet spot with maximum
heroic function is the trademark there is that you can keep going and keep doing it again and
again and again because as long as you're not going out one day and trying to do twice as much
as what you're ready for for that one specific. So the key for you is going to be picking the
right starting point and then building from there on what that day kind of entails in terms of
how much running you do. So where you could maybe get creative would be if you decided
that it's a hard fast rule that you run an hour every day, seven days a week. But we find out
that to run your maximum heroic function means you probably are better off sticking to 30 minutes.
Then what you would maybe do is you would run underneath your maximum heroic function
for the first 15 minutes in the last 15 minutes. Maybe throw some of those strides in there if
you want to do that at the very end. And then that middle 30 minutes is going to be maximum
heroic function target. And then maybe after four weeks you start noticing, you know what,
this 30 minutes isn't wearing me out near as much as it used to. I feel like I could easily push
past that. Well, let's up that to 40 minutes of that 60. You're always staying within that
60 minute parameter that keeps your schedule consistent, your routine consistent. I'm wearing
a heart rate monitor to sort of as I run to monitor it. Sure. You could do that. You could go
perceived effort. I like to use them in tandem in the sense that early on I'll maybe look at
my heart rate a little more often, especially for shorter length. Heart rate can get messy the
longer you go. So I end up kind of maybe stepping away from heart rate a little more than some will
at a certain point because ultimately I'm going to be usually training or working with someone
to run like a race that's really long and they get cardiac drift, dehydration, heat,
things that are going to make the heart rate super messy. Yeah, but your probability to measure
perceived effort is exceptionally good. Mine is actually really weak. Okay. Heart rate then.
I need to do the still the work of connecting heart rate to the perceived effort.
Yep. And that's exactly what I would use heart rate for then. And you'll get to a point probably
by like in the first couple of months where you can still lean on heart rate if you want,
but it'll be kind of one of those things where you keep looking at it, you're like,
oh, wow, I can guess it. And you play a game with yourself too. And you say, well, how close can I
guess? You'll get it. So like for me, what I'll do is I'll do the run and then I'll look at the
heart rate afterwards and be like, oh, cool. I was right there. Or I remember feeling like I
was speeding up a little bit there and their show is right there on the heart rate. Or
I also love sort of something we haven't talked about. I love pushups and pull ups of like body
weight workouts. Again, it's mostly mental. I just enjoy the mental challenge of it. I also like
it makes me feel like if all I'm doing is running, it makes me feel I'm not like
one dimensional. Yeah, one dimensional. I mean, there's some aspect to running that's
not to be like hippie about it, but like, you know, you're, you're with nature, you're running in
the, it's like we're born to do this thing. And that same way, I feel like when I'm doing pushups
and pull ups, I feel like I was born to do that kind of stuff. Like it's like this body weight
exercises have that way about them. It doesn't have that dumbbell feel or doing bench press or
squats, squats with weight. When you're just doing squats, body weight, when you're doing pushups
and pull ups, body weight, and just basic abs stuff, core stuff, body weight. I don't know,
I just love the way I feel doing that. So it's usually, I forgot to mention that part,
combine that with the running afterwards, doing some basic body weight stuff.
Yeah. And I think like you're going to get from, if we're not looking at it from like specifically
like training at a pace in order to get both the skeletal muscle adaptations as well as the
cardiovascular benefits, you're probably tapping into some of the higher intensity stuff with that
body weight stuff. Unless you're doing, I guess, no rest. It's very quick. So is it,
you're getting pretty high heart rate from that? Yeah, very hard. Okay. Higher than running. Yep.
So you're checking that box there from just like a lifestyle, enjoyment, fitness, overall fitness
standpoint. I think you want to keep your running more aerobic then because you're getting that,
and you're probably getting it from like your grappling workouts too, I would guess. So
there's just not as big of a need for you from a big picture standpoint to be
doubling down on that stuff with your runs as well. And it sounds like you prefer not to.
That's right. So I mean, what about the distance of marathon versus 100 miles? Is that big
difference? What's a good goal to work towards? Is it marathon and the rest of it just takes
care of itself? So you want to do a marathon and then ultimately do 100 mile after that? Is that
what you're saying? I have no idea what the guy wants to do. Oh, so he's going to tell you spot
on what you're doing. So you have to be ready for anything. For anything. Right. My own personal
goal is to feel somewhat challenged, but comfortable running a marathon. The longest I've ever run is
22 miles, but I, you know, there's been many stretches in my life where I would regularly
run like the long run would be close to 20 miles. So, you know, and then I was comfortably running
10 miles four months ago. It was like forever ago until I injured myself a little bit by running
in the snow and stubbing my toe to where it was like, you don't realize how much you appreciate
your toes until you stub them. That big toes where all that power comes off. And so it was
surprising how long it took to heal and how essential it was and how unpleasant running,
how much you're running with it. And then I kept like coming trying to get back out there
to run to think, I think it's okay. And no, it's not okay. You really need to let it fully heal.
At least that was my experience. I couldn't like just suck it up. It was making it worse every
time as one of those injuries that could really feel even though it's so small where it's essential.
So is there any difference between the goal of marathon or 100 miles? Would you say should I be
prepping for 100 miles if that's at all a possibility? The big difference is going to be
like you're dropping intensity significantly by going up to 100 miles versus the marathon. So
the maximum rolling function I think is actually going to feed into that maybe a little bit better.
It's probably going to be a little closer. Depending on where I mean, it all varies a bit
because like people will focus on specific distances and they'll get very efficient and very
adapted to that. So like the it kind of like it's what makes running kind of messy where like you'll
get for for example, like the average person can hit their like lactate threshold for probably
about like 60 minutes or something like that. Whereas you get these elite marathoners who've
been basically spending their entire life preparing for a marathon race, they can push
almost up to their lactate threshold and at their lactate threshold for almost like two hours. So
it gets a little messy when you start looking at it from that lens, but you don't really like to
worry about that too much because you're not really focusing on being the best possible 100
mile or the best possible marathon you could be. You want enough overall fitness that you can just
do either one of them without absolute misery because you did the couch to 100 mile. So I think
like for 100 miles the biggest difference I think given your context is just like the more
physical things you are doing, the better prepared you're going to be for the 100 mile.
So it's almost given your context. I wouldn't say irrelevant. You want to be doing running,
but you're going to be doing that once you put it in your program. It sounds like it's going to be
pretty locked in. If you view it this way, it's probably going to be more mentally beneficial
too where, hey, today I did my run. I did my body weight exercises. I did some grappling practice.
I spent three hours working out today. If you think of it like that, then you're moving your
body. You're doing things that are active for a good chunk of the day, especially relative to
most people. So that's going to actually be very helpful for you. The problem or the battle to get
over is going to just be like, you're going to break down physically running 100 miles.
I mean, you're going to break down physically running a marathon too. So you might just have
to push through a little more discomfort from a physical standpoint compared to be a few decided,
I'm going to do everything I can in these next 24 weeks to be able to run a full 100 miler.
Would you say it's physical or is it mental discomfort? I mean, isn't everything physically
uncomfortable? What do you train for if you're training for the chaos of, so it's not necessarily
100 miles. It's the chaos of the unexpected, which might include 100 miles, but it might also
include 1000 pushups in my case. You need a bit jack of all trades, which you need to be. Yeah,
but also building up the confidence or maybe not, I don't know, how do you survive 1000 pushups?
It's a combination of confidence that you have to know that you can do that kind of thing,
not necessarily the actual number, but doing crazy stuff. And the second is probably the base
strength and endurance and also just the practicing that process of not quitting.
I feel like that's one of the things I really need to do in the running space
is like doing slightly unpleasant things where I'm practicing that like bringing my mind back and
saying, nope, I'm going to keep doing it. And part of the running every day has that benefit
because some days you really don't want to, don't feel like running and doing that then you're
practicing that muscle of doing it anyway. I don't know if there's something you can say in
terms of advice how to practice the like doing something unpleasant every day. Yeah, what I
would do with that is I would try to make the unpleasant thing be different from one day to
the next if you can. So the fear I would have with making running unpleasant every time would be
it becomes like a negative feedback loop in your physiologically potentially as well as mentally
where if the entire running process is miserable, you're going to be miserable when you step on
that starting line, whether it's a marathon or 100 miles. So you've trained yourself that running
equals miserable. Well, and here's the thing, like, I mean, if you look at just like, here's where
the literature says on paper are like the, you know, dozen workouts you should do in a training
plan. And this is how you should structure them right down to the minute. And you just say like,
I'm going to give everyone this schedule, and they're going to do this every time rinse and repeat.
My biggest concern with that approach is you are potentially putting them in a position where
the training is so boring and so monotonous, that like, if they hit a roadblock mentally,
they're going to fall apart very quick because they've already exhausted themselves mentally,
just trying to do the same old interval every time, doing the same old, you know, workout,
and it doesn't necessarily have to be like one specific plan in its entirety could just be like,
like the mix of things within it. So like, rather than like, if I just said, well, we're going to do
three minute intervals to this entire short interval process or two minute intervals or
four minute intervals or 60 second intervals, you know, by that sixth week, they might be so sick
of that that they're not actually maximizing the potential within that because there's no flavor
there. And then they're also actually getting less out of themselves than they would if we just got
a little more creative and said, okay, let's mix this up and let's do, you know, four one minute
intervals, then take a little bit of a break and then we'll do three minute intervals or at least
changing it up from week to week so that they have something different showing up even though
we're addressing the same kind of physiological adaptation. So like, I think what you want to do
is you want to introduce the misery, you want to be able to test yourself to the degree where
like when you can recognize these points if I don't want to be here, but I can do it and push
through it, but recognize that like, there's not necessarily going to be one event that you want
to lean on to get that from because you won't want to make that one event so miserable that you
don't want to do it when it comes time for the challenge. So if you can possibly say like, okay,
on Tuesdays, the pushup workout, I'm going to go 10 pushups more than I want to I'm going to get to
that point where I'm like, there's no more and then I'm going to do 10 more. And you're going to
make that one miserable. And then maybe on, you know, Thursdays, you decide to do like some
of those sprints or something at the end where you do a few of them and you're like, okay,
this is where I'd be comfortable to stop. Like, well, I'm going to do two more of them because I
know I don't want to do two more of them, but mix that up. So you're not, so at least you're
getting enjoyment from some of it and not just getting complete disgust from the entire price.
Yeah, there's actually quite a lot of ways that I can introduce misery into the pushups and the
running get creative, including, you know, even just like stuff outside of the running, like
taking a freezing cold shower or those kinds of things, just introducing random kind of chaos
into the system or having conversations with people as an introvert is terrifying. More podcasts.
So now starting the training and Zach, you've been kind enough to also kind of be willing to
help me out throughout this process. So I look forward to where that goes. It's kind of fascinating.
On the diet side, you're one of the many things that make you fascinating is you've played with
diet as well. And you're somewhat famous, I would say, if we're doing low carb or playing with low
carb or meat based diets, can you describe the potential, like how you're thinking about that
has evolved and the potential beneficial role of a carnivore diet or keto diet or a meat based
diet in training as an ultra marathon runner? Yeah. And I think like where a lot of times
things get confusing for people here is the context of it too, where it's like they want
an answer as to what do I eat for endurance sport? And it's like, well, endurance sport is quite wide
ranging as we've talked about many times here. So there's going to be differences, I think,
in just like what you want to maybe necessarily prioritize both for the event you're doing
and the intensity that's required for training that's required for that event. And then also
the individual component to where I think this one often gets overlooked where we tend to say,
like, well, we've got all these Olympic medalists at the marathon and below distance who are,
you know, eating a moderate to high carbohydrate diet. So everyone needs to do that if they want
to reach their potential in, you know, say the 3k to the marathon. And, you know, in a perfect
world, maybe that would be true. But there's a lot of other variables that often get forgotten
then that could positively or negatively impact that decision choice. So I think Dr. Jeff Volk
has done a great job of kind of highlighting this in the sense that, you know, when he works with
people, he works with people in the health sphere as well as the performance sphere. And, you know,
he's one of the main guys at Virta Health who's they've got like a 60% success rate with working
with folks with type two diabetes to reverse their type two diabetes. And I mean, that's an
astounding when you think of just any nutritional protocol at success rate, they're all incredibly
low. They're very, very low. And the big difference with his is the coaching aspect of it. Like,
they give support. So these people like have someone to turn to when they make a mistake,
or if they're thinking about doing something differently, or they don't know what to do,
rather than just kind of throwing throwing it all up in the air and quitting, they have a resource
there. And that's probably a big reason why that's the success rate that they have with that is
they put those support mechanisms in place. That picture needs to be carried into the performance
world or the running world to where, you know, we may have just been identifying that, you know,
Olympic distance athletes that can tolerate a very large portion of their diet coming from
carbohydrate is going to just, it's going to filter those ones towards the Olympics filter
those towards the same. Yeah. And that doesn't mean that like, if we would have taken, say the
gold medals in the five K and put them on a low carb diet, they'd run faster, they probably wouldn't
because we may have already selected that that person's thriving on carbohydrate.
What I would be interested in is like, you have, let's say we have someone with equal talent,
but got weeded out along the way, potentially because for whatever reason, they just weren't
able to tolerate like both the training and the nutrition requirements that they're being told
to do. So the coach is kind of, there's a culture where the coaches would really push a carb heavy
diet and that that would in itself would do the filtering process of people that are not, it would
filter out the people that are not able to tolerate carbs as part of their training. I mean, I might
be an example of this actually where you take someone where they, for whatever reason, the carbs
aren't working for them, like it's unsustainable for them to continue that path. Or if they do,
they might have a shortened career. So they might be able to eke out a few really good years,
but then they're not going to be the person that are like, wow, that person's 38 and they're still
competing at the Olympics type of a person. And you put them on a low carb diet. If you can control
everything else, like their entire lifestyle is based around training and racing, then they may
still have better potential by introducing carbohydrates at a higher level. But if that's
not going to be sustainable for them as a person, then what's the point kind of at that?
Unless they want to be like a spark in the pan, so to speak.
I just feel good eating meat performance wise.
Well, I think there's that group too. They may just not be the Olympians.
Yeah. And so we're not talking, I guess this conversation has several layers. One is for
the Olympics. And one is for like, what is it, active athletes, they're like amateurs,
whatever, whatever category I put myself into, like people that exercise regularly. And then
maybe people, and then there's people who like exercise rarely. So on all of those fronts,
I mean, do you think it's possible to live a happy, active life eating meat only or mostly meat?
Yeah.
What have you learned about this?
Yeah, I think so for some context, like I followed what I would call a low carbohydrate
diet for the last 10 years. And just like kind of the training, I periodize it to a degree where
there are parts of my training where I do bring back a little more carbohydrate. And there's
periods of my training, especially like the off season where I'm like very low. And I might be
like kind of in that ballpark of like, you know, ketogenic, strict ketogenic or no carbohydrates
for periods of time.
And what kind of food are we talking about? What's a strict low carb diet?
I've ranged everywhere from like mostly plant based low carb keto to like mostly animal based.
I've very rarely gone much more than like two weeks strict where it's like I'm strict carnivore or
strict plant based or anything like that. Like we're talking probably more like 95%
at the peak in terms of any type of like longer lasting from my personal experience of like being
like either in like the animal food camp or like the plant based camp kind of a process.
So I've tried all of them things that stayed consistent over the 10 years as a kind of the
macro nutrient profile that I've done throughout the course.
So one didn't win over the other until it was a meat based versus plant based?
Oh, for me, meat based, definitely. What was, I mean, I was my highest meat consumption in 2019
and that was by far my best racing season.
Yeah, we keep coming back to that year. That was a good year for many reasons,
philosophically and nutritionally.
Yeah. Well, in 2020 happened and now I haven't had a really good chance to
We'll see. Hopefully I've got some more in the tank.
That's strange is most athletes that competed at your level
have more carbs integrated into their diets.
So what have you learned about using meat in high performance?
I think it's maybe less about the meat and it's more about like what are you, what is it replacing?
So if we go, if we step away from like me specifically and just like the people that,
because I mean, we're getting to the point where I get its anecdotes, but like,
like that's what we have at the moment because there's, I mean, there is actually a study being
done on like, I think, I guess they'd call it hyper carnivore where they're like,
I think above 80% of their intake from meat.
And they're looking at a few different things there.
But it's so weird and I keep interrupting, but so weird that it sounds unhealthy,
hyper carnivore, but it makes me feel really good.
So that's the individual thing, right?
Yeah, the individual thing.
There's countless people now who like, and I'm not saying that they could not have found
another route, myself included, like in 2011, when I switched from moderate to high carbohydrate
to low carbohydrate and saw some very noticeable differences in the way I felt,
the way I performed and all this stuff, that doesn't mean that there wasn't another path.
I just did not find that path.
And the, the fact that I found a path that was producing the results I was looking for
is really all that matters in my mind, you know, like, I don't really care if there was
a parallel path that works just as well or, you know, something like that.
Because ultimately we only have one shot at everything we're doing.
So like, it'd be great if I could go back and try four or five different things.
Well, the annoying thing is that the body adjusts to whatever the heck you're doing.
So you can't, it's hard to do good science even on yourself.
Yeah, I've referenced my 2019 racing season a few times.
And it's like, it'd be silly for me to put all of the emphasis on my nutrition plan for that
because it's also comes with two decades of endurance training.
So it's possible and it's very likely that a huge portion of that success was just the
culmination of a lot of work over time from the training side of things.
I just think like anytime you hyper focus on one area or pick a couple variables and just target
those, you find yourself in a position where you are, you're putting other things in the most
uncharitable light possible.
So, so then you have this situation where like, it's actually a combination of a variety of
different things. So where are the big movers? And, you know, for me, nutritional shift was
pretty clear that that improved my sleep and my recovery.
And I mean, people can say, well, there's the placebo effect, which is a very real concern.
But, you know, for me personally, a 10 year placebo effect would be a quite lengthy placebo
effect. And I do think it's individual though. I emphasize that a lot because I mean,
I've worked with tons of people with this and I do see a range from person to person.
I've worked with people who come to me and they're like strict keto and we raise up their
carbohydrates a bit and they're like, okay, I feel way better doing it this way. And I've
worked with people who they come to me moderate carbohydrate, but they're interested enough.
They want to try a lower carb. So we, you know, we titrate them down and I've had clients where
I'm like, okay, I'm going to give them this workout and they're going to wish they brought
back a little bit of carbohydrate and then they go and they nail the workout and I'm just like
baffled that because they're different from me. And every time, you know, when you have your
own personal experience, the first kind of guttural response is, oh, if I had done it,
would have gone this way. Why did it go the opposite way for them? And you kind of have to
just kind of step out of your own perspective a bit and say like, okay, well, they're different,
you know, for whatever reason, they're getting, getting along like this.
I've had like several moments in my life where you kind of realize
that the body is weird and it's weirder than the average advice. Like one of them is how well
I perform for my own standards when I fast. First of all, intellectually, but that's more known
and understandable, but like physically, the fact that I could train like not eat 20 hours,
24 hours, and then do a hard like jujitsu session for like two hours, like hard. It's incredible
to me. Like this makes no sense because I used to eat like many times a day. Of course, you have
to eat like you don't want to eat too close to the training session was my thinking, but you
definitely need to load up on carbs like three hours before they can order to have enough energy.
The fact that I could not eat and have like incredible focus, but also athleticism, like both
endurance and explosive. I mean, jujitsu is a special thing. It's like more like chess.
It's not like powerlifting. No, not powerlifting. Olympic lifting or it's like true explosiveness,
but that's fascinating. It makes me wonder like what other things are there to discover about
yourself? The annoying thing about food is it's delicious. And so it's hard to do good science
on yourself. Like to do for two weeks or a month to do like strict no carbs. And then maybe next
month you add 20 grams or 40 grams of carbs and see how you actually feel. Not like in that moment,
but over a period of several weeks. And then doing everything else right with based on best
available science, like with electrolytes and the vitamins, but then also like remove all the
humans from your life that affect you positively or negatively because you might feel amazing
because you're hanging out with cool people and then removing basically all the variables.
It's kind of fascinating and you kind of all of us land in a place where we find something that
worked for us and then we maybe use some of the placebo effect to help us out to stick in that
place. And then I suppose that's the way to live life. It's impossible to find the optimal for
any of us, but carnivore is an interesting new kind of caveat and new challenge to the
nutritional community because more and more people seem to be doing well under carnivore.
Yeah. Well, the nutrition community is probably we just got done like dealing with the vegans.
Now we got this opposite end of the spectrum coming at us. But I think, well, I mean, what this all
tells me is like there is for one like in our food environment, like the failure rate of any one
approach at a population level is going to be incredibly high. I mean, it's why we have what
is it like 88% of the population has some sort of metabolic syndrome. And it's because there's
an endless quantity of everything that you can get your hands on for relatively cheap.
And I think that presents a problem if your mindset is going to be we need this set of
parameters for nutrition and everyone needs to adhere to that or you're wrong. And it's like,
well, tell that to the person who like went carnivore and cleared up some like crazy skin
ailment or something like that. That's a weird one. Yeah. Like where the carnivore seems to treat
like like depression. It's like like mental stuff. It's fascinating. There's all these stories. Again,
it's anecdotes, but it's like the mental one, I think may I'm stepping out a bit on a limb here.
But I want to say like some of the research of Dominic DiAgostino and Jeff Valic was looking at
the ketogenic diet, which a carnivore diet is basically going to be a part of a ketogenic.
I mean, you could always go like way too high on the protein, I guess, but most people that I see
doing carnivore, they're cognizant enough that at least if they're doing it for therapeutic reasons,
they're not going like, you know, 50% protein 50% they're more like 70, 30, 80, 20, something like
that. And I think like you do see some work with like the brain and so the mental stuff. I know
some of the, I'm not sure if this was part of the DARPA funding that Dr. Dominic DiAgostino had,
where they were looking at things like mental stuff, like post traumatic stress disorder and
that sort of stuff with like a strict ketogenic diet. So I wonder if some of that like the
depression related stuff has to do with that, where now like their body is just fueling their brain
differently than maybe they were in the past. But that's just, you know, wild guesses on my part.
And I'm deviating from the conversation. But like,
No, that's brilliant. In terms of your own story on food, can you say something? I think we're
kind of referring to diet broadly. Can you say something about how you like to fuel your, like,
whether it's race or great training sessions, like maybe the day before, let's go even that far,
during and maybe a few hours after. Okay. It'll be a little different for racing than it will be
for like a big workout just because the interesting thing about ultra running is just like you never
do the race even like most endurance races, you're going to cover the distance, you're going to
replicate the race almost up to it in training, whereas with a hundred miles, you can't, you
might replicate a third of it. So, so I'll do, I'll walk you through kind of my approach for
for like a hundred mile race. And I can tell you maybe what I would do differently on like a training
day. But yeah, so for where the community is an agreement is that you do want to be
very good at burning fat for ultramarathons. I mean, there's just like the intensity is low.
If your, if your ratios are skewed very high towards carbohydrate metabolism, then you're
going to have to defend your muscle glycogen through tons of carbohydrate consumption. And
that's just going to be very hard to do over the course of an entire day, even at low intensities.
So it's a fuel tank thing. I mean, it's like your, your leanest endurance athletes have way more
fat than they do glycogen stores. When you're doing low intensity performance, you want to be
burning high levels of fat and sparing that muscle glycogen. What I tend to do is I want to
start the race burning really high levels of fat. So I'm going to, I'll maybe have some carbohydrate
the night before for dinner, but then I'm going to lean into the overnight fast breakfast, the morning
of, I'm going to stay away from carbohydrates for a hundred mile or anyway. And I'm going to have
something like something that's pretty like the high energy, low volume. So like I'll do like an
S fuels life bar. They've got like, what's in an S fuel life bar? Are we talking about carbs or
we're talking about protein? Fat protein, fat protein bar. And then they make some awesome.
Yeah. So it's not as low carb. Yep. Yeah, they make S fuels makes a whole product line that's
like kind of positioned for a low carb athlete. So they have some products on their lineup that
offer some carbohydrate, which is perfect for me because I do introduce some carbohydrate on racing
and some of my bigger training sessions and things. But the majority of their products are low carb.
So like they have like, you know, how you get like the powders that you put into like your
drinks that are like high carbohydrate, you know, sports products, they make a version of that,
that's like fat based. Oh, cool. That you can mix in with water? Yep. Cool. Yeah. So they've got
like a creamer version and then a fruity flavor version. So you can like replicate the taste
and the feel of drinking like a, like, you know, a sports drink. That's awesome. I know it is.
Well, and that's so much of it too, because people are always like, I don't know, I just,
I just like to have my Gatorade or whatever. It's like, well, you can have it now. It just,
it won't have all. So you can bring that kind of thing with you. Yeah. So I'm leaning on a lot
of those like kind of liquid calories, like those low volume, high energy, fat protein stuff the
morning of so that when I start the race, my body is going to be encouraged to start out burning
high levels of fat. Once I get going, probably about 45 minutes in, I'll start introducing
small amounts of carbohydrate. So at that point, my body's revving pretty high fat metabolism.
And by introducing some carbohydrate in the context of the, you know, let's say my 100 mile
personnel record, you know, I'm, I'm running approximately nine miles every hour. So I'm
probably going through about a thousand calories in an hour's time. I'm going to start just like
defending muscle glycogen by burning super high levels of fat at the heart rate I would do for
that. I'm probably burning somewhere between 80, 90% fat, you know, 12 hours of that you
can chip away at your muscle glycogen to the point where you don't necessarily want to go zero
carb. So I'm basically just trying to defend what I know I'm going to be burning from the carbohydrate
side of that 80 to 90% fat, 10 to 20% carbohydrate by taking in like usually, you know, I've gone
as low as about 15 grams of carbohydrate per hour and as high as 40 grams. And the reality is
somewhere in between is probably the sweet spot, but 40 I can get away without any digestion issues.
So I'm not really concerned pushing up to that during a race since I'm only concerned about
performance on that day. Is it the carbs that's the problem or is it fiber? Oh, from going about
40 grams? Or just because you mentioned digestion issues. Like one of the things for me, like one
of the cool things about fatty protein, protein of fat is like my stomach just feels way better.
So like carbs introduce like bloating and just not feeling great. Yeah. And I think the funny
thing is like if you look at the position paper for ultramarathon single day events and it's,
you know, it's very limited in the sense that then it's not anyone's fault. It's just we don't have
a lot of great research on 100 mile races. It's really hard to study what's going on when someone's
running 100 miles. But they will say a moderate carbohydrate diet is recommended, but they'll
also say that it's like something like 60% of participants are going to report some sort of
like digestion issue during the event. So then it kind of becomes an issue of do you want to flip
that coin? Do you want to flip that coin and be the 40% right? Exactly. So for me, what I found
is like I can push up to 40 grams without getting any digestion issues. Do I need 40 grams? Probably
not at least not based on kind of the numbers that would be like that I would see on like if I
went and actually got like a metabolic heart test or something like that. But it's possible. I mean,
if I had a really good race that I would get close to burning that per hour. Most folks that
are following a moderate high carbohydrate diet are going to be recommended to like 50 to 70 grams
during a single day ultra marathon event. And you'll see some, you know, some recommendations
of up to like 100 grams, not so much for ultra marathons, but just in general for like a performance
standpoint, which I mean, it's one of those things where it's like application versus like what you
can do in a lab for one hour is going to be a lot different, especially when you're stretching out
distances well past that. And there's, there's, I'm diverting a little here, but I mean, there's
like an approach of like training your gut so you can like be able to tolerate that much carbohydrate,
which you can do and you may have to if you're going to follow a high carbohydrate diet. But again,
we go back to that practicality standpoint of if you're a professional Olympian who's living and
breathing performance and you're burning two to three times, you're messing, resting metabolic
rate on some days, like you, you may be able to actually consume 100 grams of carbohydrate per
hour during your training sessions and, and just, you know, barely stay on top of your nutritional
needs. Most people who are running ultra marathons aren't going to be, you know, probably training
much past 10 hours per week. And they're probably not going to have the, I'll call it they're a
dietary budget to tolerate 100 grams of carbohydrate consumption during their workouts and still be able
to stay healthy. And, you know, so I think that's kind of like a, a bit of a, of a non, a non starter
for the majority of people. Unless we want to talk about like a tiny percentage of the 1% of
top performers. So maybe you can talk about the training, like feeling yourself during training
as well. Is there, and also as part of that, is it possible to train mostly fasted? Because as a
side comment, let me just say, I like, again, not anywhere, not even like one tenth of your level
of performance, but you know, I try to push myself and I just feel much better when I'm fasted. So
water and maybe some salt for longer runs for anything over like 10, 15 miles, but not no food.
Yeah, I think, I mean, I like to train on an empty stomach. I do most of my, my biggest training
sessions usually in the morning and it usually what'll determine whether I eat something or not
before that is like, how much do I need to eat that day in order to stay on top of it to be able
to train again the next day. Gotcha. So I'll, I'll, I'll usually do something similar to what I
would do before a race if I need to kind of stay on top of calories for the day. So I'm not like at
noon with like no calorie intake and like 5,000 calories to try to consume before I go to bed
that night and get out and do the same thing the next day. But yeah, I think if I were, if I were
doing what you're doing, like if that were my lifestyle, I think I would do almost all my runs
fasted. I don't see why I would be eating a lot before it because it's like, I'm just introducing
something that could, especially if you're noticing, like here's what I'd say. If I was doing that and
I was like, wow, this run sucks. And then I introduced something beforehand and now my run
was feeling great and my progress was getting better. That's when I would maybe consider
having something before, but if you're running both of those, those like self experiments,
you're noticing, yeah, if I eat something before I go on this workout, the workouts less enjoyable,
I'm not noticing any, any increased improvements on it. Again, it's a little messy, like we said
before, it's hard to really, you can't go back and try it a different way on that specific day.
But I think, I think most people, if they're just like, they go at it with like no bias in the
sense that they're like trying to make one work versus the other, you can get at least a good
enough look at it. And if absolute peak performance in one activity, one very specific activity,
isn't your goal, then it's like, do you really care if one X has a 2% performance increase
that you won't even probably notice? Because there's other variables that will clearly overpower
that 2% one way or the other. And there's some benefit in terms of freedom and letting go of like
having to think about some of these variables. I see sort of fasting is even if it's like a hit on
the performance, it's worth it to just not think about it. There's some really nice aspect to just
putting on shoes, not carrying like what shorts you wear or like what you're outfit is like not
being optimal in every way and just not caring and just enjoying the purity of just running,
no matter what, just enjoying the natural aspect. There's a side to me that sometimes just like
craves a lifestyle where it's like, I have like such a small house and only what I need and just
like a handful of food products I know I enjoy and work well for me and I don't even have the
distraction of the other stuff. There's like a there's like a there's almost like a weight that
comes off your shoulders when you can when you think even just thinking about it like it's so
simple. So the reason I'm mostly a minimalist like that, the reason I have stuff is I realize like
you probably have to fit into society and if you want to have other people in your life,
you should probably get used to having stuff. Yeah. Because most people like stuff.
Right. Well, yeah, there's that side of it too. And there's there's a whole,
you don't want to ostracize yourself too much. And I think anything you can kind of like,
you can manipulate that a little bit where there's things that are like not specific to,
you know, that's gonna negative impact the people around you or your experiences with them.
So there's a balance like everything, I guess. Yeah. I mean, that's why I drink,
I think I mentioned you offline, drink vodka, whiskey, sort of alcohol, because I don't feel good
about it the day after or sometimes multiple days after. So I know it's not good for me.
So I do a lot of stuff that's good for me. Everything we talked about,
exercise and diet and all those kinds of things. But the alcohol almost symbolizes
embracing the chaos of life, the, the wild and the amazing things that could happen.
And I think that's really important because if you optimize everything about life,
then you're going to miss most of the fun stuff that happens in life. So it's not
all about the optimization. It's some of it, like everyone has different things
on what they, how they introduce that chaos in a controlled way. For me, alcohol is that because
I'm okay drinking not too much. So I can control that aspect. Even though it's unhealthy,
it introduces just the right amount of fun that I embrace it. Yeah. And I mean,
it is one of those things where it's like, I'm going to benefit now and pay later a little bit too,
where like, and hey, if you go and you, you go out with some friends and drink and you have
memories that last a lifetime from that experience and you paid for it for a couple of days after,
then maybe that's a fair trade off from life experience. And part of the vodka thing is,
I need to honor my ancestors. So it's like, you have to, you know, you can't,
you can't turn your back on your past. Let me ask about the 100 mile world record on the treadmill.
So for most people running on a treadmill is really boring. So that's kind of their experience
of it. That's probably the first thing that would say that seems like really boring to run 100 miles
in a treadmill. Would you say it's boring? Like, what were some places your mind went to make that
happen? So this one is interesting to me because I definitely recognized the boredom and the,
the difference. The thing that the question I can't quite answer, I think with it is like,
could I have remedied that with better preparation? Because the scenario that put me on a treadmill
for 100 miles was, you know, it was March, 2020, basically the cascade of every race
on the planet got canceled. And I was in a position where I was going to be doing a
runnable 100 miler on a track in mid to late April. So I had like the majority of my training
under my belt. So I was like, kind of putting the finishing touches on that. And I was like,
oh, great. Here we are. Like, you know, what do I do with this fitness? Do I just scale back and
hope the events come back in fall and then peak again? Or do I find something to use this fitness
for? And the treadmill was the closest thing to what I had been training for in terms of just
like a mechanical like flat running, essentially, that I could, that I could think of. And my thought
was, okay, well, I'll just live stream myself on a treadmill and see what happens. It ended up turning
into like a quite a big event. But so you don't usually incorporate treadmill running into your
running into your training? I don't not incorporate it. I just don't incorporate it in the way that
would be necessarily conducive to, you know, dealing with the mental aspects of being on a
treadmill for 100 miles. Was it that different than running on a track? It was from the sense
that here's the way I describe it is when I'm on a track, it's a controlled environment and
everything can be very uniform. But there are tiny, little micro adjustments in pace that
that I'm doing subconsciously that give me the sense of control, right? No, I might run the exact
same split, but there's like a fraction of a second or, you know, a fraction second faster than
a fraction seconds slower, that equals the same outcome. It gives you that sense of control,
you're determining how fast you're going on a treadmill, you're responding to the belt. So
the advantage is you can set a pace and know you're hitting it. The disadvantage is you're
being told what to do by that machine. And that gets very frustrating. I've felt like I wanted
to step off, like you get to like certain points where you're just like, like even stepping off
what I noticed, I learned this on the day of actually, I noticed there's something where it
didn't really matter how long I get off, like I get off to use the bathroom, and that was a little
bit of a longer break. Then I had, I had like a hiccup during my event where we ran so much power
through one end of the house that the screen on the treadmill was blacking out. So we ended up,
so I ended up jumping back and forth on treadmills for quite a bit in the beginning.
And I noticed even turning it off, stepping on the other end, starting the other one up,
gave me like, you know, a handful of seconds between, was enough of a mental break of just
like that release of being told what to do to reset. So maybe if you were in the future, you would
figure out what exactly how much is needed to have them at the break. I never actually thought
about that. I mean, obviously for you, but also for people like me, like amateur runners, that
that's the source of frustration with the treadmill, that there's sometimes small adjustments in pace
that we do running, not on the treadmill, on the ground that feel like essential for that feel,
just like you said, that experience of control, like feeling like you're in control, somehow
that's really, I don't know, that's somehow liberating in the way that a treadmill can be just
the source of frustration. The funny thing though about the treadmill is I actually like to do
faster workouts on the treadmill, like long intervals or something like that or tempo runs,
because for that type of stuff, sometimes for those, I want to release the brain power required
to hit that pace and say, you take care of that. And for that, it's fun, but those are over quick,
so you don't really run into the times. Yeah, that's fascinating. For like precise control
of pace. You've also, during that stream, got to interact with one of the greatest athletes of
all time, birth pressure, what's your, he's actually doing, I don't know if you're paying
attention to this, but I guess he has a goal of running 2000 miles this year. Yeah. I don't,
I've gotten, she has to talk to Joe Rogan yesterday about this, which is fascinating.
I think he's a little bit doubtful of, of Bert's ability to be the ultra performer that he so
naturally is. Yeah. What's your thoughts about Bert as a runner? What's your advice to him?
And what was your interaction like as part of this treadmill challenge with him?
I love Bert because he's such a nice person. I mean, as a guy who's just accelerated in popularity
over the last few years, like he is like super kind. So for folks who are curious, like, I've
met Bert a couple of years earlier, and I just randomly asked him like, Hey, I'm doing this
live stream thing. We're doing it for fight for the forgotten. We're trying to raise some funds
for them. Would you want to come on the live stream for a bit? And I thought maybe he'd come
off like five or 10 minutes. And I thought that would be amazing if he did that. He ended up
coming off like over an hour. He said, he went past his slot, sat in the next slot and just
started talking with some of the other guests. It's just, he's just, Bert is definitely like,
I feel like he's as unchanged from like his popularity as one can get away with.
And it's just like his, his lifestyle, I think is very unpredictable in the sense that like,
if he wants to run like X time for a specific race, that's going to pull away from his lifestyle
so much to focus on that. Luckily for him, he's actually a great athlete. Like it's,
it's under that layer of fat. Yeah. So people who are not familiar, Bert
Crash is a comedian who takes off his shirt often has, he's a elegant layer of fat around him.
He's also a party animal. So he's a weird balance of like healthy and unhealthy.
So he drinks a lot during, I think there's some debate about that, but certainly after
his, his performances, but at the same time he's into kind of the running thing. And he does quite
a bit of treadmill running, I think. So, and like I said, has this challenge of running 2000 miles
this year. So it's fascinating to have somebody who so fully embraces life and the full joys of
life as represented by the huge amounts of drinking and partying and just being a wild man,
but also at the same time, like being at least curious about this challenging yourself in the
physical realm. It's kind of fascinating. It reminds me of one of my favorite comedians,
like Eddie Isard, who's been doing those challenges basically off the couch, just running a marathon,
a day kind of thing. It's fascinating to see the purity of those challenges when like exercise
hasn't necessarily been deeply ingrained in your life. And you kind of just embrace the challenge
anyway and take it on. And that's another way of looking at it. Because we've been talking about
running as a performance like optimization thing where training is such a huge part of this process.
Like race day is just the cherry on top. But there's for some people where the race is the cake.
It's like they just take it on as a pure challenge. As the thing you haven't really
trained for is the thing you haven't, you don't understand the intricacies of, but you take it
on anyway. And that reveals something about the human spirit as well. Yeah. And there's definitely
like a switch that flips when you in your mind decide, I'm going to do this, where then all
of a sudden it goes from like, you stop thinking about, oh, that's not possible. So like, well,
I'm just going to do it. And I think Bert highlights that perfectly in a lot of cases where like,
he's, he's maybe not even thinking it through enough to get to the point where it's like,
he gets the point where he thinks this is not possible, where most people would look at it
and think, huh, I don't know if I can actually physically accomplish that task. Bert's just like,
oh yeah, I'm going to do it. And my, my thing thought with Bert was the 2000 mile thing is
we're, are we going to find him at the end of the year with like 36 hours to go on 100 miles?
And that's right. That's right. That's what's going to happen. And it's going to be hilarious.
So speaking of things that are insane and like taking on challenges that don't seem like you
didn't, you didn't think through, you're thinking about running across the country in, in a challenge
you call the transcontinental run. Can you describe this challenge and what the heck you're thinking?
Yeah. Yeah. So this is, uh, you know, one thing that is exciting about ultramarathons,
I think in a lot of places, especially early in someone's ultramarathon adventure, if they
decide to do that as a, you know, part of their life is you have like these early years where
you're doing things for the first time. And it's like so cool and scary at the same time to think
today I'm going to run 100 miles and the furthest I've ever run before is 50 or something like
that. And you just know you're going to do something that you've never done before. You're
going to experience things you would have never been able to predict. And it's like this really
interesting, unique like human experience, I think. So for me, I've spent most of my career at this
point like doing, I got through that phase in a lot of the events I'm really interested in.
And then it was like, now let's repeat it and see if we can do it better. And you get into that
mindset for a while, which is also a fun mindset. But there is that kind of like, uh, desire to
kind of have that human experience again of like, you know, not knowing what could happen or is this
doable type of a thing, but still doing it and figuring it out along the way. So I would describe
the transcontinental project as something like that. It's not anything unique to me or anything new.
There's been a lot of people who've done it before. But essentially it's a route. There's
different routes. There's one kind of main one that's done for like the, that is used as the
record route more or less that you go from San Francisco to New York. And essentially you live
out of an RV while you're running. So you run as much as you can during the day, then you go to
bed at night and then you get up and do it again. And you're, you're handling all the logistics in
the process of trying to make sure you can get up the next day and do again, which did the day
before, which is going to be the biggest difference. So for me, I've done all single day ultra marathons
where you're going to ring yourself dry at knowing the next day or week or however long you need,
you're going to be able to just kind of like shut everything down and let them catch back up.
Whereas with this, like, you know, you're doing it again and again and again. And, you know,
the record is by a guy named Pete Costinick who average just over 72 miles a day, finished in
42 days, six hours and 30 minutes. And I mean, just like 72 miles, 73 miles. And then like
next day again, next day again, just knowing every day when you finish, you spend a whole day
running and then, okay, I'm going to go to bed. I'm going to wake up in the morning. I'm going to
have to do this again. And then, you know, have that happen for six weeks. And that's if it goes
very well. So luck I assume is a big part of this. Yeah, for sure. I mean, there's just so many
variables that are uncontrollable on this type of an experience just because I mean, you go over
this year as maybe you hit a storm, you know, you try to time it. Most people do it in start
in September. So you can get over the mountain passes without a big storm coming through.
But then also get to the East Coast before it's like the middle of winter. So like September,
early September start is kind of ideal. But you can, you know, I mean, Pete was very fortunate
from a weather standpoint. I think he made one big mistake. We had a little too aggressive
in the beginning had to take a full day off. So he actually averaged from a moving day standpoint
closer to 75 miles per day. But yeah, I mean, there's going to be things that I can't prepare for
or won't know. It's going to happen. You know, a lot of that will get a lot of the logistical
stuff will get leaned on with the crew. So that's, I mean, that's the hardest part right now is just
like getting all that put together where it's like, okay, I need to have the RV ready. I need to have
all the stuff. I knew we need to have the places figured out where we're going to stop and the
people that can, you know, dedicate that much time to an activity like that. You know, there's
a lot of moving parts even before you start the adventure itself.
When you see you're taking the San Francisco to New York?
Yeah.
And when are you doing the run?
September 1st is when, you know, barring anything like catastrophic between now and then.
This is really exciting. But I mean, this is incredible. So you probably have a bunch of
people just randomly running with you. Are people going to be tracking where you're located?
Yeah. So I'll be documenting everything because I mean, my hope is that I'm doing it primarily to
raise awareness for Fight for the Forgotten Justin Reigns charity. But with that said,
I think I am capable of if I have a good experience, you know, chasing the record or going after the
record or at least getting close to it. So you're going to try to beat this record?
Yeah, I'm going to go out with it. I'm going to structure the process in a way that leaves
that door open is the way I would describe it. I'm going to try not to do anything that would
potentially put it in a situation where that becomes the primary goal just because I want to
make sure that the reason I decided to do the first place was for Fight for the Forgotten.
So I want to make sure that I don't end up two thirds way across the country with a broken leg
and I'm like, hey, guys, I guess the donation button's turned off. So focus on like, don't
sacrifice that goal. But also there's a community aspect to it that I feel like, are you going to
I mean, so you're going to document and post, but are you going to also,
is there a safety perspective here? It's like the Forrest Gump thing. You might have
large numbers of crowds that run along with you for a while. Are you worried about that kind of
thing? I wouldn't say I'm worried about it. I mean, I think there's probably, there's remote
enough spots along the way where you'll get some alone time more likely. I don't necessarily mind
if people want to jump in, there'll be some people that will definitely want to do that and
they can come in. But the reality is like, it's probably not going to be a scenario where there's
40 people following me at all times. You say that now. Yeah, you never know. Wait for this podcast.
Yeah. And then if Joe finds out you're doing this, then we're really in trouble. All right. So
what are the things that you think will be the hardest for you? And also like, how do you train
for this kind of thing? And what are the hardest things you anticipate and how do you train for
them? Yeah. So the way I'm looking at this is it's much less about performance from the traditional
sense where I need to be able to be ex fit. I think I need to be injury proof. That's what's
going to be a detriment. If you think about it, like, if I managed to average nine minute mile
pace for a day, that would be 80 miles in a 12 hour time frame. So I'll easily have 12 hours
of moving time per day. Nine minute pace, I think is slow enough that it's not an unreasonable clip.
So like when you, I mean, obviously there's things that slow you down or I'll probably take
walking breaks, you know, stopping breaks, you got to stay on top of nutrition. That's the other
big thing too. I mean, I'm probably eating like anywhere between 10 to 15,000 calories a day,
which is, you know, I can probably count on my hand a couple of occasions where I've eaten that
much in my life. So now I got to do that for six plus weeks in a row. And you don't want any,
having stomach problem or trying to minimize the amount of stomach problems. So would you
estimate about 12 to 13 to 14 hours of running every day? Yeah, that's probably like from the
first step to the last step, it'll probably be somewhere around like say 14 hours, 13 hours
or something like that would be a pretty good estimate. And then getting rest. And so, and then
minimizing the risk of injury, which could be as small as like, like literally uneven services
resulting to like stepping the wrong way. I mean, that's going to be a lot of steps.
Yeah, yeah. So the probability of injury, are you worried about that kind of stuff?
Can you strengthen the ankles or those kinds of things that prevent
possibility of injury? And that's where I'm putting a lot of my focus in is,
I think like just being running fit is going to be like generally speaking is going to be
important. I'm going to, I think just from a lifetime of running is going to be a huge advantage.
A lot of these like kind of like mechanical movements are going to be very established.
It's just going to be about, can I tolerate that volume of it? I think that I'm doing more
strength work. I think this is something where it's like, you know, maybe adding five pounds of
lower body muscle is going to be an advantage versus a disadvantage when you're looking at
power weight ratio, because I just really don't, I never need to be running a 648 mile for this
adventure. And so I'm looking at that. I'm doing a lot more of that stuff, focusing on that.
The training is changing a fair bit where it's more polarizing versus kind of being,
I mean, I've always had some polarization in my training, but this is even to an extreme where
like I'm going to do some simulations where, you know, I go out and do two or three days where I
target the exact thing I will be doing on the Transcon. You were on Instagram posting about
these simulator runs, so you legitimately like trying to perfectly copy what would happen one,
two or three day segment on that run. Yeah. Just to kind of start to read out where are the
potential problems. So let's say I do a two or three day simulation where I'm averaging 70 miles a
day, and I find out at the end of three days, there's a really weak spot here. I need to address
that or I need to find a way to make that not a weak spot. I think that's the only way to really
get as close as you can to avoiding injury. Have you done that yet? Have you done a two day
Sony mount? Like even that's incredibly difficult. I haven't yet. I'm going to build up to it,
because that's the other thing too, is like, I don't think you want to be so aggressive with
that where you get injured trying to figure out how not to get injured. So what I'm going to start,
what I just started last week is I've, it looks really weird on my training schedule,
because like last week I ran almost 150 miles, but I took two days off. So it's like,
usually for me to get to 150 miles, that's a seven day training week. So that's the way I'm
doing it. Like I did, I did a day where I did, you know, two, like just over 20 milers separated
with by just a couple hours. And within that couple hours, I did like a three mile walk.
The following morning I woke up and ran, I think it was like just over 36 miles first thing in
the morning. Just to get an idea of just like, kind of like, what does it like to be, I mean,
this was in Phoenix too, so it was 100 degrees for the majority of that.
So to suffer, then rest, suffer again, how that feels.
There's enough precedent with this sort of an activity where like everyone I've talked to so
far has told me like there is going to be like this kind of like gradual decline in the early
stages where you're just like, okay, it's getting worse, it's getting worse, it's getting worse.
And you hit a point where you're just like, it hits kind of rock bottom. And then like,
it starts to kind of gradually improve. So you kind of have to let yourself get, it's weird. I think
I can maybe eliminate, I'm trying to find a way to eliminate some of that by doing the simulations.
Whereas I, from what I've seen, I haven't seen a lot of people do the simulation route yet.
I've seen people just do like a lot of training and then say like, okay, I'll spend the first
seven to 10 days adapting to this, and then I'll get comfortable within this environment and be
fine. Whereas I'm going to try to get to a point where like, some of that is already kind of cleared
up before I start, but not so much that I'm like adding like an extra essential week to the trip
with worth of running. What do you think would be the hardest simulator run leading up to like,
will you do three days? Yeah, I think I'll probably try to do three days
somewhere between 70 and 80 miles each will be kind of like the goal.
Will that be in August? Do you think how close to? Yeah, I would like it to be in August,
like early August would be ideal. I think like maybe the first week in August,
because that gives me kind of three weeks to let things kind of settle down from that.
But then it's crazy. This is incredible. It's actually interesting because like,
if I did, let's say I did the simulation now, the problem with that is like the adaptations
from just like the breakdown and the strengthening would likely be gone unless I did it again.
So I want to inch up to it so that like, and get close enough to the starting date so that I'm
still kind of like, you know, holding on to that adaptation when I started. So then those first
few days maybe aren't quite as miserable. And you said, if everything goes amazing and you're
challenging the record, it'll be like a 42 day run. Yeah. So that's what the record is almost
exactly six weeks. And that's at 72 and a half miles per day. So will you be posting online?
And yeah, Instagram is going to be a big one. I think I might do a few like YouTube stuff along
the way too. Yeah, I'm still iron out exactly how much I think at minimum I'll do. I'll do
some Instagram stuff. I think I'll go live on Instagram a few times during the day when I
take like walking breaks, partly just to kind of, I think keeping people and I mean, it stays true
to the goal of raising awareness, but it also I find when you bring people in, there is an added
pressure to that. But there's also this sense that I've learned from the treadmill experience
since we had like a pretty big production for that in the sense that as much as you can turn on a
camera in your own house, but like the, I remember thinking we had like 30 people lined up to come
in and guest speak during that. And there's points of that where I was like, you know,
you get that voice we talked about at the beginning where it's like, you know, maybe you
could quit. Like, do you really need to run 100 miles on a treadmill? Is this really going to be
valuable for you? And then you think about, Oh, you know what, there's, you know, Courtney DeWalter,
one of the best female ultra runners to ever exist is taken in the 30 minutes to an hour out of her
day to come on in two hours to, you know, help me, you know, amplify this event. And do I really
want to be sending emails out to these people saying, Hey guys, I know you were gracious enough to
block out time of your day. You know, I think there's a little bit of that to do where you're
like, you're, you're, you're jumping in with the community that is following along and saying,
here's how things are going, show them the best, the worst and everything between.
And then ultimately have that hold you accountable a little bit too. It's like,
harder to get up in the morning and not go back out.
I don't know how you are, but I had to, uh, whenever I did any kind of physical stuff,
like the 48 hour challenge or just any kind of running, I hated turning on the camera.
I hated it. Like, because you have to like smile and be friendly and stuff.
Oh, I'm just going to be super miserable if I'm miserable.
Well, that's it. So like, exactly. I, in some sense, that's what people.
Are we going to get a happy Zach or an angry Zach?
Exactly. It's like you're making bets. And I'm sure there'll be some days,
maybe not many, maybe very few, where you're truly happy with yourself.
Like for some weird ecstatic reason, maybe if you get over the hump, whatever that you mentioned
that this dip, I mean, it's, it's fascinating how many, how much suffering this actually entails.
I wonder.
Well, and one thing I'm going to definitely try to leverage to my advantage,
and one of the reasons why I think fight for the forgotten was the charity that really triggered me
to decide to do this. The transcontinental route was something I learned about early
in my ultra running career. And I thought to myself, I want to do that someday.
But it was one of those kind of far off distance things that it never really like
actualizing your mind until you put a date down or, you know, mention it on the Joe Rogan experience
or something like that. And then it, then it's like people want to know, when is this happening?
And, you know, what, what I try to think about is, you know, the reason Justin identified the
pygmy tribe was because they were super forgotten where, you know, we think about just like some
of these third world countries where it's a scenario of like some people, it's easy for us
here in the US to think to ourselves, well, why don't they just industrialize? Why don't they just
like, you know, start to innovate a bit? Why are they so primitive? What's wrong with them?
And in reality, like when you take, when you scale things down to the degree where
you need the entire day because of the situation you're in, just to take care of your basic needs
of water and food, you never get the opportunity to even build a real like establishment or,
you know, build on that. Like you need, you need the free time or you need a portion of your
population to have the free time available to innovate. And the pygmy tribe just hadn't had
that historically. In fact, they weren't even considered humans by like the local government
for quite some time. And, you know, the people that really pay the price in some of these situations
are the women because they're the ones that get saddled with like the water gathering and things
like that. So the reason that Justin picked wells to build was because he thought to himself,
if we can get them wells, then now these women don't spend all day walking and carrying water.
Now they can just get that water. And now we have half the population freed up for other things.
Now maybe they can start farms. They can build some housing and stuff like that. And it just,
it exponentially improves once you take care of some of those big key early things.
So when I'm thinking about like, you know, do I really need to go out here and
travel another 12 hours a day? My mind is going to hopefully go to, well, if one of those women
woke up in the pygmy tribe, one morning decided, you know what, do I really need to go get water
today? It's like, well, yeah, you do. You really do have to. Yeah, you're running for that.
Yeah. And that will give you fuel, hopefully. But yeah, I mean, the reality is always there
where I don't have to do it. Like they do have to do it. So, you know, but I think just keeping
that perspective, it puts us back to the beginning where it's, this is one of those situations where
I think it's like a no quit situation. You have to put yourself in a no quit situation here because
it's, you know, it's just bigger than you. I can't wait to see like the dark places you go.
I mean, there's some, yeah, the quit situations. And hopefully we get to have a glimpse of those
because I think those are really inspiring when somebody is both gets broken by them because
you know how tough you are, but also is almost broken and overcomes it. I mean, that's just
fascinating stories. I can't wait. I know, does Joe know you're doing this, by the way?
Yeah, I sent him a note a while back because he was the first spot I mentioned it on. So,
I think he knows. I'm not sure if he's following about the exact starting date or not.
He will know. This is great. You'll probably think you're a crazy MF for doing this, but
I think you'll love it. And I think I love it. And I think the world will love it.
A ridiculous question. Who's the greatest endurance runner or endurance athlete of all time?
Oh, that's a good question. I think I'd probably go maybe two directions here.
I think, uh, Heli Geberlasi is one of the best, in my opinion, because just, I mean, 27 world
records, like not all the different distance, but like breaking and rebreaking and that sort of stuff.
I mean, he ran two, what was it, 20359 before the shoe technology came in that is estimated
at anywhere between a two to 8% performance advantage. I talked about a two hour marathon,
two, zero, three, two hour, three minutes. Yeah. So, he did that with the old shoe technology,
which essentially dates back to anything. If you were a Nike athlete, it could date back to as early
as, I think early 2016 is when the first prototype started showing up. So, if you were before that
in your career, you were using, you're guaranteed to be using the old shoe technology.
And I mean, just the range of it too. And yeah, it's hard. I mean, there's, it's a...
Is he a marathon runner purely? No, he did everything. That's why I picked him, I think,
because he went everywhere, everything from the 800 and is like at a national level.
800? Yeah. At a national level. I don't, he wasn't competing at like Olympics or anything
in the 800, but he was mostly like 5K to marathon. Yeah. Yeah. So, just incredible. I mean,
I could go a totally different direction too. I think like Steve Prefontaine stands out in,
as an American runner, just because if you look at it outside of just like performances
and stuff like that, I think he based, like you can't find an American male runner who
probably didn't get some motivation or some catalyst into their running journey from a
Prefontaine story or... What would you say is inspiring about Prefontaine? Like from the philosophy,
from the technique, from his story? I think there's a few things. I mean, there's a lot of things,
which is why he is who he is. It's a... One was just his attitude about it, where he wasn't like
this picture ask runner. I mean, he was obviously talented, but you have the perfect story of like
he wanted to be good at something. Like most American kids tried football. No hard work was
going to get Prefontaine starting in varsity for football. Starts running, fell in love with a mile.
His college coach told him, no, you're not going to be a miler, you're going to be a 5K guy,
and he popularized the 5K in the United States or three mile in some cases. And I mean, the way he
would race, I think, is what really made him interesting for folks, where he was just like
all guts runner, where he's like... I mean, one of his famous quotes was like, if you beat me,
you're going to have to bleed to do it because he's going to be in all guts race and in a sport
where it gets very tactical at times, especially at the national, or I shouldn't say national,
but at the like competition level, the championship level, where it's like kind of more of a sit and
kick approach a lot of times where everyone's kind of waiting for someone to make a move,
like Pre was going to make a move really early. Yeah. So this idea of leading from the front,
which I guess is tactically really a bad idea. Well, from a running a PR standpoint,
it's a bad idea in most cases. But so race, I guess, is not just about the PR.
What's about winning in a lot of cases, and that's what he thought was going to put him in
the best advantage to win, I think. It's just to run from the front. I mean, what do you...
Because you mentioned this, the 100 mile, you ran, you were in second place, and then in 90s,
you were able to get to the first place. How hard is it to run when you're in first place?
You know, I think this is really different. Some people thrive under it, where it's like for them,
like I talked about Jim Walms before, I think he loves being in the front. If he's in the front,
he loves it. That's where he's excited. That's where he knows he's doing what he's doing,
where he's pushing his limits and things like that. Pre was probably the same way.
And then I think there's other folks who are much more comfortable kind of saying,
let's let things settle down here a little bit, and then I'll make my move when it's time to make
my move. Or they think of it as... And this is a very important, I think lesson for the average
ultra runner is just like knowing what you're capable of is going to be an important piece
to the puzzle because you can try to say, I want to run faster than I'm capable of
in an early part of a 100 miler, but then you're going to pay for it at the end.
So really, unless you're trying to go for the win and that's a tactic that you think is going to
produce a win versus trying to run your fastest time, you got to run within yourself, within your
parameters. Obviously, there's a big question about where those parameters are in a lot of cases,
which makes ultramarathon even more interesting because it's like, there's so much unknown about
it. It's like, well, maybe you can go faster and we just don't know yet.
So there's in the face of that uncertainty, there's something admirable like it was with
prefrontain where you take the risk and run faster than you think you might be able to run
in terms of pace that you can hold. So push the pace that's possible.
Yeah. Explore the unknown. It's like a pioneer spirit, right? Next frontier kind of a thing.
But I mean, prefrontain also, there's other angles with him too, where he was like in the
amateur era where to be an Olympian, you couldn't be pro. So he's turning down, I mean, the guy was
on food stamps and living in a trailer because he wanted to run at the Olympics. And there was a lot
of like politics involved with not being able to take sponsorship money and things like that,
which has changed since then. But so he was huge in the movement for that to kind of like,
you know, have a situation where now, as an athlete, you can finish, in most cases, finish
college, sign a big contract with, you know, a sponsor, and then also still compete in the
Olympic games and go to the events that are actually ones that are going to likely catapult
your career in most of the Olympic distance endurance events. So he just revolutionized
the sport. And then to add even more flavor to the whole thing, I mean, he died a very premature
death. He got a car accident and died before he would have likely probably meddled at the Olympics.
So he and there is a tragedy that he didn't.
Yeah, well, he was fourth place at the Olympics, the prior his first go of it. And it was kind of
one of those things where it's like fourth place at the Olympics is the first man looking out of
the first woman looking out. And for a guy that had as much hype as him, I think like a medal was
something he really wanted to take home with him there. And especially how that race went. I mean,
yeah, I don't know, it's, it's, it's tragic the whole thing. But that's one of the things that
makes Olympics amazing is the tragedy of it. Like one race decides the story of a lifetime,
which is like, yeah, that's why it's, that's why it's amazing. Even if a lot of people get hurt
because of it. Tragedy makes the, the triumph special. Right. Yeah. I mean, it makes life
like a movie almost. Exactly. You know, if everything's all sunshine and rainbows, and it's not as
entertaining to watch, there's no adversity to overcome. You mentioned shoe technology.
How much has shoe technology advanced through the past few decades? How much has it changed
running generally, but also running like ultra marathon running? I would say in ultra running,
it's had much of a less of an impact because ultra running is still heavily skewed towards the
trails. So the technology, at least from what we know, isn't necessarily translating over to these
like massive, varied terrain, certainly not the technical terrain and things like that.
Now on road races, flat stuff, like the track stuff, the roads, the run, I guess you, a runnable
trail where it's just like basically crushed limestone, more or less. You definitely get an
advantage from it. It's, and essentially what, what happened is in, this probably dated back
actually before 2015, you know, Nike decided, well, their, their, their development team
was ahead of the curve. They developed this new foam, they call it like a Peabock foam,
and they, they realized that like when you step down into a shoe, the reason like
racers a lot of times would wear these flats because they're trying to take out any of that
lost energy into the foam in the shoe. Well, this foam that Nike came out with is so good that it
actually returns way more energy than the average foam did to the point where like when they test
these things on like force plate treadmills and things like that, it's like a, depending on the
person's gate and some of the things is like a two to 8% improvement in performance. I mean,
we've seen records just across the board get broken since this came out. All distances.
Basically, yeah. Yeah. I think from, at least from the 5k up through the marathon, and I mean,
we've seen some insane improvements in the marathon. I think like the women's marathon
went from what was considered a relatively untouchable like 216 to a 214. And I mean,
like it was like 218 was like just world class. Like if you could run a 218 marathon as a woman,
that was like, I mean, it still is to a degree, but then, you know, now you have someone run a 214.
Like that's a huge. And you attributed a lot of that to the, the shoe. Yeah.
Yeah. I think there's probably other things that come in mind too. Like now that people
know there's a performance advantage from a mechanical standpoint, it's also a confidence
thing where it's like, oh, now I can probably try going five seconds per mile faster and maybe
they could have anyway and they just now they think they can. So they are. So there's probably a
little bit of that that's just adding to it. Do you think there's a lot of extra innovation
that's still possible? Like what if you could do this kind of big leap with a little innovation
of foam? Is there other stuff that you can do or further innovation of materials that make up the
foam? Yeah. So they can definitely go much more advantage. They put a cap on it essentially. So
there was a, there's also a carbon plate element to this too, where they put like this carbon
plate in there in between the foam. So like, I believe when, when Kipchagi broke, well, when
they did that, that kind of the sub two hour project, he actually had on a shoe, if I'm not
mistaken, that never got to market because they put down some parameters on it after before it,
that one came to market where it was actually like stacked up to, I can't remember how many
millimeters, it was an insane amount. And then they had like, I think maybe even three layer
plates in there. And those are Nike shoe here as well. Yeah. Yeah. So what makes it kind of
controversial or difficult is Nike came out with these prototypes. So prototype for people
don't understand shoes, like these, these companies, they'll develop a shoe and it usually takes
like somewhere in the neighborhood of like probably 18 months to hit the market. So if you're like,
if sponsored athlete or work for the company, you can get your hands on these shoes before
they actually come to market. So we had an issue, I think this wasn't necessarily as big of an issue
in the ultra running community, but in the track and field, Olympic distance stuff was a big issue
because you had Nike athletes having these prototype shoes before anyone could get them.
And then you had athletes who were sponsored by these other brands who couldn't wear them,
even if, even when they did come to market. So then we had this like chase to catch up where
other companies are starting to make their own version of it. And now we're getting to a point
where most companies have a version of that shoe. But we had a huge transition phase
that impacted the Olympics big time. I mean, think of here, here's a, here's an example of it.
There was a, there was an athlete Kara Goucher. She was not, she wasn't like the athlete, wasn't
when they came out with this shoe. And she ran the Olympic trial marathon and got fourth place,
the first person out. And two of the people had ever had that shoe on. And she was maybe a minute
or two, I'd have to look to see exactly, but it was within the performance advantage range.
And so you could argue that she was the first person in modern running to lose an Olympic spot
due to a technological disadvantage. Wow. And, and it's like, I mean, it's one of those.
It's kind of profound. Yeah. I mean, it's one of those things where like it's, it's a transition,
right? So there's going to be bumpy road and there's going to be people that get caught in
that transition that it's unfortunate for. But it's also like, you know, once everything
does catch up and every shoe company has a version of this, there's still problems. I mean,
these are incredibly expensive shoes. It's like a $250 shoe. So it's like, at what point do you
tell like a wealthy family with a high school kid that, you know, you can get that $250 shoe,
but then you go, this kid's family can barely afford a pair of shoes for them, much less a $250
pair of shoes. Like where do we draw that line? And that sort of stuff. Also just, here's the
other big one. Like let's, I mean, two to 8% is a massive range. What if you're on the 2% versus
someone's on the 8%? You know, chances are if you're, you know, blowing a record out of the water,
you're probably closer to that high end percentage versus someone who's maybe getting
incremental gains, you're probably closer to that lower end. So is it fair to have a piece of
equipment that has that big of a range when we're talking about less than a percent determining
these races when all is held constant? Those are fascinating, like philosophical questions that I
think it's nice to solve that for the shoe or to raise those questions for a shoe, because the more
complicated place where they will be raised is probably like genetics, genetic engineering,
all those kinds of things. Yeah, you'll get a lot more complicated. So it's nice when you have like
a particular piece of technology that's just like right there, it's a shoe, we can understand it,
we can study it. Right. And we may be coming on the precipice of like human powered sport
performance is no longer being something that we like look at as this like pinnacle of like,
I don't maybe entertainments the wrong word, but like, is that a pursuit? Do we end up just
going a different direction? I mean, I think it's like, it's so hard for us to think about that
right now because it's so part of like the culture and the lifestyle of the average person where
like sport is a hobby of theirs as well as a passion to follow. And it's like, how complicated
does it need to get before people lose that interest? And there could be a future where most
of the Olympics is esports. Somebody told me that esports is in the Olympics. I've been meaning
to look this up, which is, you know, like what video, so video games are in the Olympics. Yeah.
It could be as like a trial that they're doing. Yeah. If this is true, I'm trying to in real time
look it up. But if there's esports joining Olympics in 2024, wow. So that could be just a,
that could be a fun side thing, but it could be a first step into a complete transformation
what sports mean. Yeah. You can control video games better than you control
for genetics and humans. Well, and in reality, we've been dealing with this problem in other
areas just with the performance enhancing side of things with drugs and all that stuff too. And
anyway, that conversations flared back up with track and field too, where we are seeing a lot
of records get broken. A lot of it probably is to shoot technology, but, you know, in 2020 with
the COVID stuff, you have all these out of competition testing protocols that a lot of these
top tier Olympic athletes are getting to try to eliminate. Like if you just do intercompetition
testing, like there's potential for people to do things that are going to give them a
performance advantage, but not going to show up on that test on the day of or after their race,
where now you have these like limitations of being able to test. So do we have like a group
of athletes now who decide, oh, I'm not going to get tested in 2020, do the COVID restrictions?
This is the time to dope up and then, you know, hit some stride and some records and then,
you know, taper back off when they get this thing fired back up again. And so there may be
some of that as well. And I mean, that's always been an ongoing problem. And that's where the
boost you get from performance enhancing drugs could be tiny relative to the stuff we have in
the future. Right. Yeah. So you might be the last generation of like natural unmodified humans
that were running. And who knows, maybe that's already over. Who knows who's who's modified.
That's that's true. You might, we might be living through that transition to the new Nike shoe,
but broadly defined. Yeah. Yeah. So you'll be in some sense in the history books as
humans used to run without any modifications. Used to destroy their body and let it recover
and then do it again. And they used to be impressed with a within 11 hour, 100 mile
time when we could do it in under an hour now. Yeah. Yeah. So, but nevertheless, it is incredible.
The four mile, the four minute miles incredibly impressive. I really love the 11 hour mark
for the 100 miler and the two hour marathon by most people for the longest time was thought to be
impossible. You know, there's still people that think it's impossible with under certain constraints.
So, Elliot Kupchogi of Kenya, as you mentioned, ran a one hour 59 minute 40 second marathon,
but he had, like you said, the prototype shoes and he had the pace setters. Yeah. I don't know
how essential that is, but it seems quite essential. Do you think it's possible? First of all,
what do you think about that accomplishment? And he is one of the greatest, if not the greatest
marathon runners of all time. What do you think about that accomplishment? And do you think it's
possible to run a two hour marathon without any assistance? Yeah. I mean, I think there's no
question about it, regardless of technology, he's world class, if not the best. I think
he could go under two hour, someone equivalent to him could go under two hours with the shoe
technology. Probably, what it will take is it'll take a fast course, a course that has very few
tangents because turning on a course, they estimate it adds about a percent to the distance.
So, when we're talking about a marathon, you're getting up to like a quarter mile extra running,
that alone could potentially put you down near too flat based on what we're seeing because,
I mean, Kipchegi's got a, was it 20140, I believe, is his actual world record where it's actually
like certified. So, I mean, he's right on the door knocking on the door there. Yeah, the prototype
he had, since then they put in a regulation where you can't stack a shoe for the roads more than 40
millimeters. So, you can only have so much of that energy returning foam and you can only have,
I think, one carbon plate in there now. So, that puts a little bit of a ceiling on that
technological thing. But who knows what else will come out in that. And to be honest, who comes out
with it? Because the fact that Nike came out with this technology is the reason why it's being
allowed to be used, if it would have been like another running company that came out with it.
I'm sure the regulations would have been slapped down on it immediately and they would have probably
just thrown it out altogether would have been. Yeah, oh yeah. Well, I mean, it's, you can go,
you can go super negative with that and say like, hey, this is terrible or this is like
super nefarious. When in reality, it's like, you have a company that has billions of dollars
and is interested enough into the sport that otherwise doesn't generate a ton of revenue
to, you know, pick up a big tab and support like, you know, track and field and things like that.
But, you know, with that, you know, if you want to be the guy who says, yeah, thanks for the
millions and millions of dollars, but we're going to, all those years and money you spent on that
foam, you wasted it, we're not going to let you use it. But, you know, if you're another company who,
you know, revolutionized the sport in potentially a negative way, you know, maybe,
maybe you say no to them. So, it gets interesting. That's the way. That's how it always happens.
Yeah, yeah. There's really no way around. I think Phil Mephaton, I think it's him that he wrote a
book about a two hour marathon. What are the limits? How fast could we run? And I think he puts it
like an hour and 42 minutes, something like that, or 40 something minutes. It's kind of an interesting
question of what are the limits? Do you think, do you think we'll just keep pushing the limits of
what humans are capable of in the ultras, in the marathon? Is this just like the way of sport?
I think ultra for sure, because that is a fastly growing sport. And it's, there's
a lot of potential for a much bigger pool of talent to pull from that could really push the
needle down on some of these performances and things like that, especially as it becomes more
popular. If people start realizing, or I shouldn't say realizing, but if a scenario happens where
like, oh, I'm one of the best endurance athletes in the world, I make more money running ultra
marathons than I do running the marathon. Then, you know, all of a sudden we see every record
get broken in the matter of a couple of years. But the, for the marathon, I mean,
it's going to get faster, I think, but like to what degree is so hard to know. It's very hard to
know and the one hour and 40 minutes seems like that's pretty fast. That's very fast. I mean,
folks, for some perspective, they're the current world record is like in the four forties per
mile per mile. Like just to add a little flavor to that basically sprinting. Yeah. I mean, go out to
a track and run one lap as fast as you can. And then reflect on what time you get and realize
like the world record for the marathon is that is that lap at just over 70 seconds per lap.
So minute and 10, just over that, but you're doing it 26.2 miles. So over a hundred times,
it's mind boggling. But watching Elliot Chogie just first of all, he was like smiling at the end
of it. So the there's an extreme efficiency here too. So he's not, he's able to just find the right
way to maximize efficiency. It makes it look easy. I mean, that's true for basically every
Olympic athlete. When you watch gymnasts, they kind of make it look easy. But there's like tens,
if not hundreds of thousands of hours behind that training. Yeah. Just to be comfortable
enough to even attempt some of the moves they do in gymnastics is mind boggling.
Well, that one is super awesome because how tragic it is like one little slip up
four years of work and you're it's all gone. Not just four years of work for many of them.
A lifetime of work and their teenagers and their teenagers and the gay dedicated everything
to it. That's that's what makes the pursuits of humans so fascinating. We kind of talked about
this a little bit already. But is there something that stands out to you as one of the hardest
things you've had to overcome in all the either training or the competing that you've done? Has
there been moments that kind of stand out where you're proud of yourself that that you were truly
tested and you overcame it? I think I'd be more inclined just because it stands out to me much
bigger than any one like hard decision or outcome I had from a particular race is just like the
trajectory of like, you know, doing what I'm doing now is so much different from what I would have
ever expected. You know, I mean, I was a talented enough runner where I could make the state meet
by my senior year at a small division three school and, you know, compete at a division
three college and be pretty modest talent comparative to my to my peers at the top level
division three. To think that like I'd be doing anything that was revolved around running as
as an occupation is is I still second guess that that's actually occurring makes me wonder
about the whole simulation theory thing. It's like, who's got my joystick and what I do with it?
They got G codes. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, because I mean, I went to school to be a teacher and I
really loved that profession I taught for about five years. And then I got to a point where,
you know, some of it's just perfect timing to like the sport gain enough popularity where there's
enough money in it where like, I could start a coaching business, I could get sponsorships and
things like that, and actually look at it and say financially, I can make a go of this or at least
risk it. But there's such a fine line between like deciding to do that or kind of staying comfortable
because I mean, I was at the perfect teaching spot for me. I was at this like project based
learning school and just outside of Madison, Wisconsin loved it. One of the hardest decision
my life to make was to step away from that to pursue running it more holistically. And I mean,
I almost didn't I had a co teacher who was I was thinking myself I knew that was like a decision
I was gonna have to make the next few years, but it was such an easy decision to say, well,
wait one more year. And he was just like, he was a little more of a free spirit than I was
certainly at the time he's like, dude, what are you waiting for? Just go. Why are you here?
After I told him that he like every time we I'd come into I'd come into school the next day
and he'd be like, why are you still here? But I mean, that was there's a tongue in cheek for sure.
But it's hard to know that you're going to be successful, right? And that kind of leap given
your like, you know, because it's easier when you're like an ultra performer early on. But
to have the faith that you can accomplish something. In some regards, it's a blessing in
the sense that like, you know, failing would have been fairly predictable. Whereas if like,
you know, I always wonder, I mean, I think of these like, especially the big sports like
baseball, football and basketball, and you get, you know, guys who guys and girls who are like,
identified in like early high school as being the next. And it's like, what kind of pressure is that
to think like, well, if I'm not like, literally one of the best players in the NBA in 10 years,
I failed. It's just mind boggling to think if I'm not one of the best at one of the most competitive
sports on the planet, in what is an athletic, I think an athletic state of an NBA basketball
player is probably one of the most athletic human beings on the planet. And to know like in a teenage
year that your, your, your success bar is being the best one of the best in the league or the best
ever. And that conversations floating around everywhere you look and see versus being able
to kind of quietly fail and go back to teaching. It makes it a little more digestible, I think.
You have a little bit more freedom to be great, right? Nobody's expecting you to be right.
Is there, from that, is there advice you can give to young people today, high schoolers,
college students, taking on, trying to figure out their career, trying to figure out their life,
advice on how to succeed in either? Yeah, I think, you know, one thing I was always interested
when I was teaching was like, you'd have these, you'd have students who had like interests,
they had what they were good at. And sometimes those ran in unison with one another,
other times they didn't. And it was always interesting to me when you'd have a student who's
like, I'm really into like, you know, guitar, or I'm really into skateboarding or something like
that where it's like, pretty small like success rate on that avenue versus what you could maybe
accomplish by focusing on just something that's a little more standard. And I think like, really,
like, besides the likelihood of it becoming something you can turn into a professional or
not, you should just ask yourself, like, is this something that I want to spend my free time doing?
And because if it is, then you want to keep that in your life, because that's something
that's rewarding, motivating, it might be the catalyst that gets you out of bed in the morning
and, you know, go to another job in order to go do that thing afterwards. And I think
nowadays, we're getting to a point where like, the, your reachability from even a really small,
like, unmonetized thing previously is now an option where if like, you live in a city where
there's only two other people interested in your topic of area, so you're not going to turn into
a job. Now, with the internet, you have the world at your disposal. So that two to three people in
every town can turn into thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds and millions of people. And
if you really focus your time and energy into that thing, then, you know, who knows where you
can go and how much more enjoyable your life can be if you're able to turn your career into a passion
of yours. So I think like, that is something I would tell, tell people, focus on that. See the
thing you're good at and you kind of sparks that flame and go with that, even if society doesn't
really want you to, like, it's non traditional. And the odds are low of like, traditionally
defined success. Just do that thing. I've struggled with that. It's like, it was always clear,
especially like in school, there's stuff I'm actually good at and stuff that the world wants
me to do. Right. Yeah. And I kept doing that. The world wanted me to be a plumber when I took
that test my sophomore year. But even like, like academically, just going to university and
academia, there are certain ways, even in, I would say, even in the thing you want to do,
the way you do that thing, the world will want you to do it a certain way. And even just like
finding your way of doing that thing is really powerful. Like for me, the way I do research,
the way I learn is different than colleagues of mine. And I've realized that, that I really like
to follow things I'm passionate about versus sort of the rigor of studying every of like the
fundamentals all across the board and building up in castle on the fundamentals like layer upon
layer. It's just, there's a bunch of details in the way I pursue the very thing that I currently do
that's different than others. And it took me quite a long time to accept like, you don't need to do
it the way everyone else is doing it. It doesn't, not everyone else, but majority of people are
telling you to do it. Because one is beneficial to do it different, because then you'll more
likely stand out. And two, like, why the hell are you doing it the way it's not working for you?
Yeah. Yeah. You know, I saw that all the time when I was teaching, I was dual certified. I was,
my, my certifications were in history and Broadfield social studies. So like econ, psychology,
history, all that stuff. And then I also had a certification of special education, which was,
you know, people think of special education a lot of times as like, Oh, it's the, you know,
the kid who is not smart enough to do the regular thing. When reality, it's like,
like, I mean, there is some, you know, there's obviously like, you know, like certain things
like Down syndrome and stuff like that. But like, there's also like a huge population of groups of
both like gifted and talented on one end of the spectrum where they're incredibly smart.
And they're like the geniuses, but for whatever reason, the standard method of learning does
not click with them, does not work with them. And then they just need a slightly different path
or maybe a drastically different path, and they're going to just flourish. And you have kids that
end up falling on the other end where, you know, maybe it's really difficult for them
to be able to read at the speed of other students. But if you give them this specific
direction, they can just thrive in a certain area. And just seeing that like the, you know,
like that there's multiple ways to do stuff. And there's not necessarily one path to the end
is I think such an eye opening thing to learn, especially if you learn, maybe that's what I
should answer the question that you asked me with is, you know, keep an open mind as to what
paths there are forward and know that, you know, maybe just because even if you look to your
left, you're just going to write and all your classmates are successful doing it one way,
it doesn't necessarily mean that's going to be the way for you. Yeah. So that could land you in
eating a meat based diet running across the country. Like the, the incredible madman that
you are, Zach, I'm a huge fan, as I told you many times, you're an inspiration to many. I'll be there
checking in every day. If you somehow make it out the starting line on September 1st,
I know, I know Joe Rogan and millions of others will be as well. So I'm excited to see
all the suffering that you're going to go through. I wish you the best of luck. And
thank you so much for talking today. I really, really appreciate it. Well, thanks a bunch,
Lex. It's been an honor to come on your podcast. I've been a fan of it for, for quite some time.
And I thought about wearing a white suit, but Michael Malist already took care of that one.
Well, and I think it would be really good for the ratings of this conversation,
if you end up dying during that run. So I'll do my best. So the, the, everything that could
happen, it'll be positive for, for the world. You're saying I should try to average 100 miles a
day. 100 miles. Well, I think you're going to push yourself to, again, it's not the main priority,
but it's trying to beat that record. That's probably going to take everything you have. And
then that, that's truly inspiring. I wish you the best of luck, man. Thanks a bunch.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Zach Bitter. And thank you to Ladder,
Bell Campo, Noom, and BetterHelp. Check them out in the description to support this podcast.
And now let me leave you with some words from Steve Prefontein. I'm going to work so that it's
a pure Gus race at the end. And if it is, I'm the only one who can win it. Thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time.